The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana, by Vatsyayana

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana
       Translated From The Sanscrit In Seven Parts With Preface,
       Introduction and Concluding Remarks

Author: Vatsyayana

Translator: Richard Burton
            Bhagavanlal Indrajit
            Shivaram Parashuram Bhide

Release Date: January 18, 2009 [EBook #27827]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KAMA SUTRA OF VATSYAYANA ***




Produced by Bruce Albrecht, Carla Foust, Jon Noring and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice. Printer
errors have been changed and are listed at the end.




   THE

   KAMA SUTRA

   OF

   VATSYAYANA.

   TRANSLATED FROM THE SANSCRIT.

   IN SEVEN PARTS,

   WITH

   PREFACE, INTRODUCTION,

   AND

   CONCLUDING REMARKS.

   Reprint:

   _Cosmopoli: MDCCCLXXXIII: for the Kama Shastra Society of
   London and Benares, and for private circulation only._




   DEDICATED

   TO THAT SMALL PORTION OF THE BRITISH PUBLIC
   WHICH TAKES ENLIGHTENED INTEREST IN
   STUDYING THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS
   OF THE OLDEN EAST.




PREFACE.


In the literature of all countries there will be found a certain number
of works treating especially of love. Everywhere the subject is dealt
with differently, and from various points of view. In the present
publication it is proposed to give a complete translation of what is
considered the standard work on love in Sanscrit literature, and which
is called the 'Vatsyayana Kama Sutra,' or Aphorisms on Love, by
Vatsyayana.

While the introduction will bear with the evidence concerning the date
of the writing, and the commentaries written upon it, the chapters
following the introduction will give a translation of the work itself.
It is, however, advisable to furnish here a brief analysis of works of
the same nature, prepared by authors who lived and wrote years after
Vatsya had passed away, but who still considered him as a great
authority, and always quoted him as the chief guide to Hindoo erotic
literature.

Besides the treatise of Vatsyayana the following works on the same
subject are procurable in India:--

     1. The Ratirahasya, or secrets of love.

     2. The Panchasakya, or the five arrows.

     3. The Smara Pradipa, or the light of love.

     4. The Ratimanjari, or the garland of love.

     5. The Rasmanjari, or the sprout of love.

     6. The Anunga Runga, or the stage of love; also called
          Kamaledhiplava, or a boat in the ocean of love.

The author of the 'Secrets of Love' (No. 1) was a poet named Kukkoka. He
composed his work to please one Venudutta, who was perhaps a king. When
writing his own name at the end of each chapter he calls himself "Siddha
patiya pandita," _i.e._, an ingenious man among learned men. The work
was translated into Hindi years ago, and in this the author's name was
written as Koka. And as the same name crept into all the translations
into other languages in India, the book became generally known, and the
subject was popularly called Koka Shastra, or doctrines of Koka, which
is identical with the Kama Shastra, or doctrines of love, and the words
Koka Shastra and Kama Shastra are used indiscriminately.

The work contains nearly eight hundred verses, and is divided into ten
chapters, which are called Pachivedas. Some of the things treated of in
this work are not to be found in the Vatsyayana, such as the four
classes of women, viz., the Padmini, Chitrini, Shankini and Hastini, as
also the enumeration of the days and hours on which the women of the
different classes become subject to love. The author adds that he wrote
these things from the opinions of Gonikaputra and Nandikeshwara, both of
whom are mentioned by Vatsyayana, but their works are not now extant. It
is difficult to give any approximate idea as to the year in which the
work was composed. It is only to be presumed that it was written after
that of Vatsyayana, and previous to the other works on this subject that
are still extant. Vatsyayana gives the names of ten authors on the
subject, all of whose works he had consulted, but none of which are
extant, and does not mention this one. This would tend to show that
Kukkoka wrote after Vatsya, otherwise Vatsya would assuredly have
mentioned him as an author in this branch of literature along with the
others.

The author of the 'Five Arrows' (No. 2 in the list) was one Jyotirisha.
He is called the chief ornament of poets, the treasure of the sixty-four
arts, and the best teacher of the rules of music. He says that he
composed the work after reflecting on the aphorisms of love as revealed
by the gods, and studying the opinions of Gonikaputra, Muladeva,
Babhravya, Ramtideva, Nundikeshwara and Kshemandra. It is impossible to
say whether he had perused all the works of these authors, or had only
heard about them; anyhow, none of them appear to be in existence now.
This work contains nearly six hundred verses, and is divided into five
chapters, called Sayakas or Arrows.

The author of the 'Light of Love' (No. 3) was the poet Gunakara, the son
of Vechapati. The work contains four hundred verses, and gives only a
short account of the doctrines of love, dealing more with other
matters.

'The Garland of Love' (No. 4) is the work of the famous poet Jayadeva,
who said about himself that he is a writer on all subjects. This
treatise is, however, very short, containing only one hundred and
twenty-five verses.

The author of the 'Sprout of Love' (No. 5) was a poet called Bhanudatta.
It appears from the last verse of the manuscript that he was a resident
of the province of Tirhoot, the son of a Brahman named Ganeshwar, who
was also a poet. The work, written in Sanscrit, gives the descriptions
of different classes of men and women, their classes being made out from
their age, description, conduct, etc. It contains three chapters, and
its date is not known, and cannot be ascertained.

'The Stage of Love' (No. 6) was composed by the poet Kullianmull, for
the amusement of Ladkhan, the son of Ahmed Lodi, the same Ladkhan being
in some places spoken of as Ladana Mull, and in others as Ladanaballa.
He is supposed to have been a relation or connection of the house of
Lodi, which reigned in Hindostan from A.D. 1450-1526. The work would,
therefore, have been written in the fifteenth or sixteenth century. It
contains ten chapters, and has been translated into English, but only
six copies were printed for private circulation. This is supposed to be
the latest of the Sanscrit works on the subject, and the ideas in it
were evidently taken from previous writings of the same nature.

The contents of these works are in themselves a literary curiosity.
There are to be found both in Sanscrit poetry and in the Sanscrit drama
a certain amount of poetical sentiment and romance, which have, in every
country and in every language, thrown an immortal halo round the
subject. But here it is treated in a plain, simple, matter of fact sort
of way. Men and women are divided into classes and divisions in the same
way that Buffon and other writers on natural history have classified and
divided the animal world. As Venus was represented by the Greeks to
stand forth as the type of the beauty of woman, so the Hindoos describe
the Padmini or Lotus woman as the type of most perfect feminine
excellence, as follows:

She in whom the following signs and symptoms appear is called a Padmini.
Her face is pleasing as the full moon; her body, well clothed with
flesh, is soft as the Shiras or mustard flower, her skin is fine,
tender and fair as the yellow lotus, never dark coloured. Her eyes are
bright and beautiful as the orbs of the fawn, well cut, and with reddish
corners. Her bosom is hard, full and high; she has a good neck; her nose
is straight and lovely, and three folds or wrinkles cross her
middle--about the umbilical region. Her yoni resembles the opening lotus
bud, and her love seed (Kama salila) is perfumed like the lily that has
newly burst. She walks with swan-like gait, and her voice is low and
musical as the note of the Kokila bird, she delights in white raiments,
in fine jewels, and in rich dresses. She eats little, sleeps lightly,
and being as respectful and religious as she is clever and courteous,
she is ever anxious to worship the gods, and to enjoy the conversation
of Brahmans. Such, then, is the Padmini or Lotus woman.

Detailed descriptions then follow of the Chitrini or Art woman; the
Shankhini or Conch woman, and the Hastini or Elephant woman, their days
of enjoyment, their various seats of passion, the manner in which they
should be manipulated and treated in sexual intercourse, along with the
characteristics of the men and women of the various countries in
Hindostan. The details are so numerous, and the subjects so seriously
dealt with, and at such length, that neither time nor space will permit
of their being given here.

One work in the English language is somewhat similar to these works of
the Hindoos. It is called 'Kalogynomia: or the Laws of Female Beauty,'
being the elementary principles of that science, by T. Bell, M.D., with
twenty-four plates, and printed in London in 1821. It treats of Beauty,
of Love, of Sexual Intercourse, of the Laws regulating that Intercourse,
of Monogamy and Polygamy, of Prostitution, of Infidelity, ending with a
_catalogue raisonn√©e_ of the defects of female beauty.

Other works in English also enter into great details of private and
domestic life. 'The Elements of Social Science, or Physical, Sexual and
Natural Religion,' by a Doctor of Medicine, London, 1880, and 'Every
Woman's Book,' by Dr. Waters, 1826. To persons interested in the above
subjects these works will be found to contain such details as have been
seldom before published, and which ought to be thoroughly understood by
all philanthropists and benefactors of society.

After a perusal of the Hindoo work, and of the English books above
mentioned, the reader will understand the subject, at all events from a
materialistic, realistic and practical point of view. If all science is
founded more or less on a stratum of facts, there can be no harm in
making known to mankind generally certain matters intimately connected
with their private, domestic, and social life.

Alas! complete ignorance of them has unfortunately wrecked many a man
and many a woman, while a little knowledge of a subject generally
ignored by the masses would have enabled numbers of people to have
understood many things which they believed to be quite incomprehensible,
or which were not thought worthy of their consideration.




INTRODUCTION.


It may be interesting to some persons to learn how it came about that
Vatsyayana was first brought to light and translated into the English
language. It happened thus. While translating with the pundits the
'Anunga runga, or the stage of love,' reference was frequently found to
be made to one Vatsya. The sage Vatsya was of this opinion, or of that
opinion. The sage Vatsya said this, and so on. Naturally questions were
asked who the sage was, and the pundits replied that Vatsya was the
author of the standard work on love in Sanscrit literature, that no
Sanscrit library was complete without his work, and that it was most
difficult now to obtain in its entire state. The copy of the manuscript
obtained in Bombay was defective, and so the pundits wrote to Benares,
Calcutta and Jeypoor for copies of the manuscript from Sanscrit
libraries in those places. Copies having been obtained, they were then
compared with each other, and with the aid of a Commentary called
'Jayamangla' a revised copy of the entire manuscript was prepared, and
from this copy the English translation was made. The following is the
certificate of the chief pundit:--

"The accompanying manuscript is corrected by me after comparing four
different copies of the work. I had the assistance of a Commentary
called 'Jayamangla' for correcting the portion in the first five parts,
but found great difficulty in correcting the remaining portion, because,
with the exception of one copy thereof which was tolerably correct, all
the other copies I had were far too incorrect. However, I took that
portion as correct in which the majority of the copies agreed with each
other."

The 'Aphorisms on Love,' by Vatsyayana, contains about one thousand two
hundred and fifty slokas or verses, and are divided into parts, parts
into chapters, and chapters into paragraphs. The whole consists of
seven parts, thirty-six chapters, and sixty-four paragraphs. Hardly
anything is known about the author. His real name is supposed to be
Mallinaga or Mrillana, Vatsyayana being his family name. At the close of
the work this is what he writes about himself:

"After reading and considering the works of Babhravya and other ancient
authors, and thinking over the meaning of the rules given by them, this
treatise was composed, according to the precepts of the Holy Writ, for
the benefit of the world, by Vatsyayana, while leading the life of a
religious student at Benares, and wholly engaged in the contemplation of
the Deity. This work is not to be used merely as an instrument for
satisfying our desires. A person acquainted with the true principles of
this science, who preserves his Dharma (virtue or religious merit), his
Artha (worldly wealth) and his Kama (pleasure or sensual gratification),
and who has regard to the customs of the people, is sure to obtain the
mastery over his senses. In short, an intelligent and knowing person,
attending to Dharma and Artha and also to Kama, without becoming the
slave of his passions, will obtain success in everything that he may
do."

It is impossible to fix the exact date either of the life of Vatsyayana
or of his work. It is supposed that he must have lived between the first
and the sixth centuries of the Christian era, on the following
grounds:--He mentions that Satkarni Srtvahan, a king of Kuntal, killed
Malayevati his wife with an instrument called kartari by striking her in
the passion of love, and Vatsya quotes this case to warn people of the
danger arising from some old customs of striking women when under the
influence of this passion. Now this king of Kuntal is believed to have
lived and reigned during the first century A.C., and consequently Vatsya
must have lived after him. On the other hand, Virahamihira, in the
eighteenth chapter of his 'Brihatsanhita,' treats of the science of
love, and appears to have borrowed largely from Vatsyayana on the
subject. Now Virahamihira is said to have lived during the sixth century
A.D., and as Vatsya must have written his works previously, therefore
not earlier than the first century, A.C., and not later than the sixth
century A.D., must be considered as the approximate date of his
existence.

On the text of the 'Aphorisms on Love,' by Vatsyayana, only two
commentaries have been found. One called 'Jayamangla' or 'Sutrabashya,'
and the other 'Sutra vritti.' The date of the 'Jayamangla' is fixed
between the tenth and thirteenth centuries A.D., because while treating
of the sixty-four arts an example is taken from the 'K√°vyaprak√°sha,'
which was written about the tenth century A.D. Again, the copy of the
commentary procured was evidently a transcript of a manuscript which
once had a place in the library of a Chaulukyan king named Vishaladeva,
a fact elicited from the following sentence at the end of it:--

"Here ends the part relating to the art of love in the commentary on the
'Vatsyayana Kama Sutra,' a copy from the library of the king of kings,
Vishaladeva, who was a powerful hero, as it were a second Arjuna, and
head jewel of the Chaulukya family."

Now it is well known that this king ruled in Guzerat from 1244 to 1262
A.D., and founded a city called Visalnagur. The date, therefore, of the
commentary is taken to be not earlier than the tenth and not later than
the thirteenth century. The author of it is supposed to be one
Yashodhara, the name given him by his preceptor being Indrapada. He
seems to have written it during the time of affliction caused by his
separation from a clever and shrewd woman, at least that is what he
himself says at the end of each chapter. It is presumed that he called
his work after the name of his absent mistress, or the word may have
some connection with the meaning of her name.

This commentary was most useful in explaining the true meaning of
Vatsyayana, for the commentator appears to have had a considerable
knowledge of the times of the older author, and gives in some places
very minute information. This cannot be said of the other commentary,
called "Sutra vritti," which was written about A.D., by Narsing Shastri,
a pupil of a Sarveshwar Shastri; the latter was a descendant of Bhaskur,
and so also was our author, for at the conclusion of every part he calls
himself Bhaskur Narsing Shastra. He was induced to write the work by
order of the learned Raja Vrijalala, while he was residing in Benares,
but as to the merits of this commentary it does not deserve much
commendation. In many cases the writer does not appear to have
understood the meaning of the original author, and has changed the text
in many places to fit in with his own explanations.

A complete translation of the original work now follows. It has been
prepared in complete accordance with the text of the manuscript, and is
given, without further comments, as made from it.




PART I.

THE VATSYAYANA SUTRA.

INTRODUCTORY PREFACE.

SALUTATION TO DHARMA, ARTHA AND KAMA.


In the beginning, the Lord of Beings created men and women, and in the
form of commandments in one hundred thousand chapters laid down rules
for regulating their existence with regard to Dharma,[1] Artha,[2] and
Kama.[3] Some of these commandments, namely those which treated of
Dharma, were separately written by Swayambhu Manu; those that related to
Artha were compiled by Brihaspati; and those that referred to Kama were
expounded by Nandi, the follower of Mahadeva, in one thousand chapters.

Now these 'Kama Sutra' (Aphorisms on Love), written by Nandi in one
thousand chapters, were reproduced by Shvetaketu, the son of Uddvalaka,
in an abbreviated form in five hundred chapters, and this work was again
similarly reproduced in an abridged form, in one hundred and fifty
chapters, by Babhravya, an inhabitant of the Punchala (South of Delhi)
country. These one hundred and fifty chapters were then put together
under seven heads or parts named severally--

1st. Sadharana (general topics).

2nd. Samprayogika (embraces, etc.).

3rd. Kanya Samprayuktaka (union of males and females).

4th. Bharyadhikarika (on one's own wife).

5th. Paradika (on the wives of other people).

6th. Vaisika (on courtesans).

7th. Aupamishadika (on the arts of seduction, tonic medicines, etc.).

The sixth part of this last work was separately expounded by Dattaka at
the request of the public women of Pataliputra (Patna), and in the same
way Charayana explained the first part of it. The remaining parts, viz.,
the second, third, fourth, fifth, and seventh were each separately
expounded by--

Suvarnanabha (second part).

Ghotakamukha (third part).

Gonardiya (fourth part).

Gonikaputra (fifth part).

Kuchumara (seventh part), respectively.

Thus the work being written in parts by different authors was almost
unobtainable, and as the parts which were expounded by Dattaka and the
others treated only of the particular branches of the subject to which
each part related, and moreover as the original work of Babhravya was
difficult to be mastered on account of its length, Vatsyayana,
therefore, composed his work in a small volume as an abstract of the
whole of the works of the above-named authors.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Dharma is acquisition of religious merit, and is fully
described in Chapter 5, Volume III., of Talboys Wheeler's 'History of
India,' and in the edicts of Asoka.]

[Footnote 2: Artha is acquisition of wealth and property, etc.]

[Footnote 3: Kama is love, pleasure and sensual gratification.

These three words are retained throughout in their original, as
technical terms. They may also be defined as virtue, wealth and
pleasure, the three things repeatedly spoken of in the Laws of Manu.]




PART I.


CHAPTER I.

BEING THE INDEX TO OR CONTENTS OF THE WORK.


     Chapter II. Observations on the three worldly attainments of
                    Virtue, Wealth and Love.

        "   III. On the study of the Sixty-four Arts.

        "    IV. On the Arrangements of a House, and Household Furniture;
                    and about the Daily Life of a Citizen, his
                    Companions, Amusements, &c.

        "     V. About classes of Women fit and unfit for Congress with
                    the Citizen, and of Friends, and Messengers.


PART II.

ON SEXUAL UNION.

     Chapter I. Kinds of Union according to Dimensions, Force of Desire,
                   and Time; and on the different kinds of Love.

        "   II. Of the Embrace.

        "  III. On Kissing.

        "   IV. On Pressing or Marking with the Nails.

        "    V. On Biting, and the ways of Love to be employed with
                   regard to Women of different countries.

        "   VI. On the various ways of Lying Down, and the different
                   kinds of Congress.

        "  VII. On the various ways of Striking, and of the Sounds
                   appropriate to them.

        " VIII. About females acting the part of Males.

        "   IX. On holding the Lingam in the Mouth.

        "    X. How to begin and how to end the Congress. Different
                   kinds of Congress, and Love Quarrels.


PART III.

ABOUT THE ACQUISITION OF A WIFE.

     Chapter I. Observations on Betrothal and Marriage.

        "   II. About creating Confidence in the Girl.

        "  III. Courtship, and the manifestations of the feelings by
                   outward signs and deeds.

        "   IV. On things to be done only by the Man, and the
                   acquisition of the Girl thereby. Also what to be done
                   by a Girl to gain over a Man and subject him to her.

        "    V. On the different Forms of Marriage.


PART IV.

ABOUT A WIFE.

     Chapter I. On the manner of living of a virtuous Woman, and of her
                   behaviour during the absence of her Husband.

        "   II. On the conduct of the eldest Wife towards the other
                   Wives of her husband, and of the younger Wife towards
                   the elder ones. Also on the conduct of a Virgin Widow
                   re-married; of a Wife disliked by her Husband; of the
                   Women in the King's Harem; and of a Husband who has
                   more than one Wife.


PART V.

ABOUT THE WIVES OF OTHER PEOPLE.

     Chapter I. On the Characteristics of Men and Women, and the reason
                   why Women reject the Addresses of Men. About Men who
                   have Success with Women, and about Women who are
                   easily gained over.

        "   II. About making Acquaintance with the Woman, and of the
                   efforts to gain her over.

        "  III. Examination of the State of a Woman's mind.

        "   IV. The business of a Go-between.

        "    V. On the Love of Persons in authority with the Wives of
                   other People.

        "   VI. About the Women of the Royal Harem, and of the keeping
                   of one's own Wife.


PART VI.

ABOUT COURTESANS.

     Chapter I. Of the Causes of a Courtesan resorting to Men; of the
                   means of Attaching to herself the Man desired, and
                   the kind of Man that it is desirable to be acquainted
                   with.

        "   II. Of a Courtesan living with a Man as his Wife.

        "  III. Of the means of getting Money; of the Signs of a Lover
                   who is beginning to be weary, and of the way to get
                   rid of him.

        "   IV. About a Re-union with a former Lover.

        "    V. Of different kinds of Gain.

        "   VI. Of Gains and Losses, attendant Gains and Losses, and
                   Doubts; and lastly, the different kinds of
                   Courtesans.


PART VII.

ON THE MEANS OF ATTRACTING OTHERS TO ONE'S SELF.

     Chapter I. On Personal Adornment, subjugating the hearts of others,
                   and of tonic medicines.

        "   II. Of the Means of exciting Desire, and of the ways of
                   enlarging the Lingam. Miscellaneous Experiments and
                   Receipts.




PART I.




CHAPTER II.

ON THE ACQUISITION OF DHARMA, ARTHA AND KAMA.


Man, the period of whose life is one hundred years, should practise
Dharma, Artha, and Kama at different times and in such a manner that
they may harmonize together and not clash in any way. He should acquire
learning in his childhood, in his youth and middle age he should attend
to Artha and Kama, and in his old age he should perform Dharma, and thus
seek to gain Moksha, _i.e._, release from further transmigration. Or, on
account of the uncertainty of life, he may practise them at times when
they are enjoined to be practised. But one thing is to be noted, he
should lead the life of a religious student until he finishes his
education.

_Dharma_ is obedience to the command of the Shastra or Holy Writ of the
Hindoos to do certain things, such as the performance of sacrifices,
which are not generally done because they do not belong to this world,
and produce no visible effect; and not to do other things, such as
eating meat, which is often done because it belongs to this world, and
has visible effects.

Dharma should be learnt from the Shruti (Holy Writ), and from those
conversant with it.

_Artha_ is the acquisition of arts, land, gold, cattle, wealth,
equipages and friends. It is, further, the protection of what is
acquired, and the increase of what is protected.

Artha should be learnt from the king's officers, and from merchants who
may be versed in the ways of commerce.

_Kama_ is the enjoyment of appropriate objects by the five senses of
hearing, feeling, seeing, tasting, and smelling, assisted by the mind
together with the soul. The ingredient in this is a peculiar contact
between the organ of sense and its object, and the consciousness of
pleasure which arises from that contact is called Kama.

Kama is to be learnt from the Kama Sutra (aphorisms on love) and from
the practice of citizens.

When all the three, viz., Dharma, Artha, and Kama come together, the
former is better than the one which follows it, _i.e._, Dharma is better
than Artha, and Artha is better than Kama. But Artha should be always
first practised by the king, for the livelihood of men is to be obtained
from it only. Again, Kama being the occupation of public women, they
should prefer it to the other two, and these are exceptions to the
general rule.


_Objection 1._

Some learned men say that as Dharma is connected with things not
belonging to this world, it is appropriately treated of in a book; and
so also is Artha, because it is practised only by the application of
proper means, and a knowledge of those means can only be obtained by
study and from books. But Kama being a thing which is practised even by
the brute creation, and which is to be found everywhere, does not want
any work on the subject.


_Answer._

This is not so. Sexual intercourse being a thing dependent on man and
woman requires the application of proper means by them, and those means
are to be learnt from the Kama Shastra. The non-application of proper
means, which we see in the brute creation, is caused by their being
unrestrained, and by the females among them only being fit for sexual
intercourse at certain seasons and no more, and by their intercourse not
being preceded by thought of any kind.


_Objection 2._

The Lokayatikas[4] say:--Religious ordinances should not be observed,
for they bear a future fruit, and at the same time it is also doubtful
whether they will bear any fruit at all. What foolish person will give
away that which is in his own hands into the hands of another?
Moreover, it is better to have a pigeon to-day than a peacock to-morrow;
and a copper coin which we have the certainty of obtaining, is better
than a gold coin, the possession of which is doubtful.


_Answer._

It is not so. 1st. Holy Writ, which ordains the practice of Dharma, does
not admit of a doubt.

2nd. Sacrifices such as those made for the destruction of enemies, or
for the fall of rain, are seen to bear fruit.

3rd. The sun, moon, stars, planets and other heavenly bodies appear to
work intentionally for the good of the world.

4th. The existence of this world is effected by the observance of the
rules respecting the four classes[5] of men and their four stages of
life.

5th. We see that seed is thrown into the ground with the hope of future
crops.

Vatsyayana is therefore of opinion that the ordinances of religion must
be obeyed.


_Objection 3._

Those who believe that destiny is the prime mover of all things say:--We
should not exert ourselves to acquire wealth, for sometimes it is not
acquired although we strive to get it, while at other times it comes to
us of itself without any exertion on our part. Everything is therefore
in the power of destiny, who is the lord of gain and loss, of success
and defeat, of pleasure and pain. Thus we see the Bali[6] was raised to
the throne of Indra by destiny, and was also put down by the same power,
and it is destiny only that can re-instate him.


_Answer._

It is not right to say so. As the acquisition of every object
pre-supposes at all events some exertion on the part of man, the
application of proper means may be said to be the cause of gaining all
our ends, and this application of proper means being thus necessary
(even where a thing is destined to happen), it follows that a person who
does nothing will enjoy no happiness.


_Objection 4._

Those who are inclined to think that Artha is the chief object to be
obtained argue thus. Pleasures should not be sought for, because they
are obstacles to the practice of Dharma and Artha, which are both
superior to them, and are also disliked by meritorious persons.
Pleasures also bring a man into distress, and into contact with low
persons; they cause him to commit unrighteous deeds, and produce
impurity in him; they make him regardless of the future, and encourage
carelessness and levity. And lastly, they cause him to be disbelieved by
all, received by none, and despised by everybody, including himself. It
is notorious, moreover, that many men who have given themselves up to
pleasure alone, have been ruined along with their families and
relations. Thus, King Dandakya,[7] of the Bhoja dynasty, carried off a
Brahman's daughter with evil intent, and was eventually ruined and lost
his kingdom. Indra, too, having violated the chastity of Ahalya,[8] was
made to suffer for it. In a like manner the mighty Kichaka,[9] who tried
to seduce Draupadi, and Ravana,[10] who attempted to gain over Sita, were
punished for their crimes. These and many others fell by reason of their
pleasures.


_Answer._

This objection cannot be sustained, for pleasures, being as necessary
for the existence and well being of the body as food, are consequently
equally required. They are, moreover, the results of Dharma and Artha.
Pleasures are, therefore, to be followed with moderation and caution. No
one refrains from cooking food because there are beggars to ask for it,
or from sowing seed because there are deer to destroy the corn when it
is grown up.

Thus a man practising Dharma, Artha and Kama enjoys happiness both in
this world and in the world to come. The good perform those actions in
which there is no fear as to what is to result from them in the next
world, and in which there is no danger to their welfare. Any action
which conduces to the practice of Dharma, Artha and Kama together, or of
any two, or even one of them, should be performed, but an action which
conduces to the practice of one of them at the expense of the remaining
two should not be performed.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 4: These were certainly materialists who seemed to think that
a bird in the hand was worth two in the bush.]

[Footnote 5: Among the Hindoos the four classes of men are the Brahmans
or priestly class, the Kshutrya or warlike class, the Vaishya or
agricultural and mercantile class, and the Shoodra or menial class. The
four stages of life are, the life of a religious student, the life of a
householder, the life of a hermit, and the life of a Sunyasi or
devotee.]

[Footnote 6: Bali was a demon who had conquered Indra and gained his
throne, but was afterwards overcome by Vishnu at the time of his fifth
incarnation.]

[Footnote 7: Dandakya is said to have abducted from the forest the
daughter of a Brahman, named Bhargava, and being cursed by the Brahman,
was buried with his kingdom under a shower of dust. The place was called
after his name the Dandaka forest, celebrated in the Ramayana, but now
unknown.]

[Footnote 8: Ahalya was the wife of the sage Gautama. Indra caused her
to believe that he was Gautama, and thus enjoyed her. He was cursed by
Gautama and subsequently afflicted with a thousand ulcers on his body.]

[Footnote 9: Kichaka was the brother-in-law of King Virata, with whom
the Pandavas had taken refuge for one year. Kichaka was killed by Bhima,
who assumed the disguise of Draupadi. For this story the Mahabarata
should be referred to.]

[Footnote 10: The story of Ravana is told in the Ramayana, which with the
Mahabarata form the two great epic poems of the Hindoos; the latter was
written by Vyasa, and the former by Valmiki.]




CHAPTER III.

ON THE ARTS AND SCIENCES TO BE STUDIED.


Man should study the Kama Sutra and the arts and sciences subordinate
thereto, in addition to the study of the arts and sciences contained in
Dharma and Artha. Even young maids should study this Kama Sutra along
with its arts and sciences before marriage, and after it they should
continue to do so with the consent of their husbands.

Here some learned men object, and say that females, not being allowed to
study any science, should not study the Kama Sutra.

But Vatsyayana is of opinion that this objection does not hold good, for
women already know the practice of Kama Sutra, and that practice is
derived from the Kama Shastra, or the science of Kama itself. Moreover,
it is not only in this but in many other cases that though the practice
of a science is known to all, only a few persons are acquainted with the
rules and laws on which the science is based. Thus the Yadnikas or
sacrificers, though ignorant of grammar, make use of appropriate words
when addressing the different Deities, and do not know how these words
are framed. Again, persons do the duties required of them on auspicious
days, which are fixed by astrology, though they are not acquainted with
the science of astrology. In a like manner riders of horses and
elephants train these animals without knowing the science of training
animals, but from practice only. And similarly the people of the most
distant provinces obey the laws of the kingdom from practice, and
because there is a king over them, and without further reason.[11] And
from experience we find that some women, such as daughters of princes
and their ministers, and public women, are actually versed in the Kama
Shastra.

A female, therefore, should learn the Kama Shastra, or at least a part
of it, by studying its practice from some confidential friend. She
should study alone in private the sixty-four practices that form a part
of the Kama Shastra. Her teacher should be one of the following persons,
viz., the daughter of a nurse brought up with her and already
married,[12] or a female friend who can be trusted in everything, or the
sister of her mother (_i.e._, her aunt), or an old female servant, or a
female beggar who may have formerly lived in the family, or her own
sister, who can always be trusted.

The following are the arts to be studied, together with the Kama
Sutra:--

1. Singing.

2. Playing on musical instruments.

3. Dancing.

4. Union of dancing, singing, and playing instrumental music.

5. Writing and drawing.

6. Tattooing.

7. Arraying and adorning an idol with rice and flowers.

8. Spreading and arraying beds or couches of flowers, or flowers upon
the ground.

9. Colouring the teeth, garments, hair, nails, and bodies, _i.e._,
staining, dyeing, colouring and painting the same.

10. Fixing stained glass into a floor.

11. The art of making beds, and spreading out carpets and cushions for
reclining.

12. Playing on musical glasses filled with water.

13. Storing and accumulating water in aqueducts, cisterns and
reservoirs.

14. Picture making, trimming and decorating.

15. Stringing of rosaries, necklaces, garlands and wreaths.

16. Binding of turbans and chaplets, and making crests and top-knots of
flowers.

17. Scenic representations. Stage playing.

18. Art of making ear ornaments.

19. Art of preparing perfumes and odours.

20. Proper disposition of jewels and decorations, and adornment in
dress.

21. Magic or sorcery.

22. Quickness of hand or manual skill.

23. Culinary art, _i.e._, cooking and cookery.

24. Making lemonades, sherbets, acidulated drinks, and spirituous
extracts with proper flavour and colour.

25. Tailor's work and sewing.

26. Making parrots, flowers, tufts, tassels, bunches, bosses, knobs,
&c., out of yarn or thread.

27. Solution of riddles, enigmas, covert speeches, verbal puzzles and
enigmatical questions.

28. A game, which consisted in repeating verses, and as one person
finished, another person had to commence at once, repeating another
verse, beginning with the same letter with which the last speaker's
verse ended, whoever failed to repeat was considered to have lost, and
to be subject to pay a forfeit or stake of some kind.

29. The art of mimicry or imitation.

30. Reading, including chanting and intoning.

31. Study of sentences difficult to pronounce. It is played as a game
chiefly by women and children, and consists of a difficult sentence
being given, and when repeated quickly, the words are often transposed
or badly pronounced.

32. Practice with sword, single stick, quarter staff, and bow and arrow.

33. Drawing inferences, reasoning or inferring.

34. Carpentry, or the work of a carpenter.

35. Architecture, or the art of building.

36. Knowledge about gold and silver coins, and jewels and gems.

37. Chemistry and mineralogy.

38. Colouring jewels, gems and beads.

39. Knowledge of mines and quarries.

40. Gardening; knowledge of treating the diseases of trees and plants,
of nourishing them, and determining their ages.

41. Art of cock fighting, quail fighting and ram fighting.

42. Art of teaching parrots and starlings to speak.

43. Art of applying perfumed ointments to the body, and of dressing the
hair with unguents and perfumes and braiding it.

44. The art of understanding writing in cypher, and the writing of words
in a peculiar way.

45. The art of speaking by changing the forms of words. It is of various
kinds. Some speak by changing the beginning and end of words, others by
adding unnecessary letters between every syllable of a word, and so on.

46. Knowledge of language and of the vernacular dialects.

47. Art of making flower carriages.

48. Art of framing mystical diagrams, of addressing spells and charms,
and binding armlets.

49. Mental exercises, such as completing stanzas or verses on receiving
a part of them; or supplying one, two or three lines when the remaining
lines are given indiscriminately from different verses, so as to make
the whole an entire verse with regard to its meaning; or arranging the
words of a verse written irregularly by separating the vowels from the
consonants, or leaving them out altogether; or putting into verse or
prose sentences represented by signs or symbols. There are many other
such exercises.

50. Composing poems.

51. Knowledge of dictionaries and vocabularies.

52. Knowledge of ways of changing and disguising the appearance of
persons.

53. Knowledge of the art of changing the appearance of things, such as
making cotton to appear as silk, coarse and common things to appear as
fine and good.

54. Various ways of gambling.

55. Art of obtaining possession of the property of others by means of
muntras or incantations.

56. Skill in youthful sports.

57. Knowledge of the rules of society, and of how to pay respects and
compliments to others.

58. Knowledge of the art of war, of arms, of armies, &c.

59. Knowledge of gymnastics.

60. Art of knowing the character of a man from his features.

61. Knowledge of scanning or constructing verses.

62. Arithmetical recreations.

63. Making artificial flowers.

64. Making figures and images in clay.

A public woman, endowed with a good disposition, beauty and other
winning qualities, and also versed in the above arts, obtains the name
of a Ganika, or public woman of high quality, and receives a seat of
honour in an assemblage of men. She is, moreover, always respected by
the king, and praised by learned men, and her favour being sought for by
all, she becomes an object of universal regard. The daughter of a king
too, as well as the daughter of a minister, being learned in the above
arts, can make their husbands favourable to them, even though these may
have thousands of other wives besides themselves. And in the same
manner, if a wife becomes separated from her husband, and falls into
distress, she can support herself easily, even in a foreign country, by
means of her knowledge of these arts. Even the bare knowledge of them
gives attractiveness to a woman, though the practice of them may be only
possible or otherwise according to the circumstances of each case. A man
who is versed in these arts, who is loquacious and acquainted with the
arts of gallantry, gains very soon the hearts of women, even though he
is only acquainted with them for a short time.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 11: The author wishes to prove that a great many things are
done by people from practice and custom, without their being acquainted
with the reason of things, or the laws on which they are based, and this
is perfectly true.]

[Footnote 12: The proviso of being married applies to all the teachers.]




CHAPTER IV.

THE LIFE OF A CITIZEN.[13]


Having thus acquired learning, a man, with the wealth that he may have
gained by gift, conquest, purchase, deposit,[14] or inheritance from his
ancestors, should become a householder, and pass the life of a citizen.
He should take a house in a city, or large village, or in the vicinity
of good men, or in a place which is the resort of many persons. This
abode should be situated near some water, and divided into different
compartments for different purposes. It should be surrounded by a
garden, and also contain two rooms, an outer and an inner one. The inner
room should be occupied by the females, while the outer room, balmy with
rich perfumes, should contain a bed, soft, agreeable to the sight
covered with a clean white cloth, low in the middle part, having
garlands and bunches of flowers[15] upon it, and a canopy above it, and
two pillows, one at the top, another at the bottom. There should be also
a sort of couch besides, and at the head of this a sort of stool, on
which should be placed the fragrant ointments for the night, as well as
flowers, pots containing collyrium and other fragrant substances, things
used for perfuming the mouth, and the bark of the common citron tree.
Near the couch, on the ground, there should be a pot for spitting, a box
containing ornaments, and also a lute hanging from a peg made of the
tooth of an elephant, a board for drawing, a pot containing perfume,
some books, and some garlands of the yellow amaranth flowers. Not far
from the couch, and on the ground, there should be a round seat, a toy
cart, and a board for playing with dice; outside the outer room
there should be cages of birds,[16] and a separate place for spinning,
carving, and such like diversions. In the garden there should be a
whirling swing and a common swing, as also a bower of creepers covered
with flowers, in which a raised parterre should be made for sitting.

Now the householder having got up in the morning and performed his
necessary duties,[17] should wash his teeth, apply a limited quantity of
ointments and perfumes to his body, put some ornaments on his person and
collyrium on his eyelids and below his eyes, colour his lips with
alacktaka,[18] and look at himself in the glass. Having then eaten betel
leaves, with other things that give fragrance to the mouth, he should
perform his usual business. He should bathe daily, anoint his body with
oil every other day, apply a lathering[19] substance to his body every
three days, get his head (including face) shaved every four days, and
the other parts of his body every five or ten days.[20] All these things
should be done without fail, and the sweat of the armpits should also be
removed. Meals should be taken in the forenoon, in the afternoon, and
again at night, according to Charayana. After breakfast, parrots and
other birds should be taught to speak, and the fighting of cocks,
quails, and rams should follow. A limited time should be devoted to
diversions with Pithamardas, Vitas, and Vidushakas,[21] and then should
be taken the midday sleep.[22] After this the householder, having put on
his clothes and ornaments, should, during the afternoon, converse with
his friends. In the evening there should be singing, and after that the
householder, along with his friend, should await in his room, previously
decorated and perfumed, the arrival of the woman that may be attached to
him, or he may send a female messenger for her, or go for her himself.
After her arrival at his house, he and his friend should welcome her,
and entertain her with a loving and agreeable conversation. Thus end the
duties of the day.

The following are the things to be done occasionally as diversions or
amusements.

1. Holding festivals[23] in honour of different Deities.

2. Social gatherings of both sexes.

3. Drinking parties.

4. Picnics.

5. Other social diversions.


_Festivals._

On some particular auspicious day, an assembly of citizens should be
convened in the temple of Saraswati.[24] There the skill of singers, and
of others who may have come recently to the town, should be tested, and
on the following day they should always be given some rewards. After
that they may either be retained or dismissed, according as their
performances are liked or not by the assembly. The members of the
assembly should act in concert, both in times of distress as well as in
times of prosperity, and it is also the duty of these citizens to show
hospitality to strangers who may have come to the assembly. What is said
above should be understood to apply to all the other festivals which may
be held in honour of the different Deities, according to the present
rules.


_Social Gatherings._

When men of the same age, disposition and talents, fond of the same
diversions and with the same degree of education, sit together in
company with public women,[25] or in an assembly of citizens, or at the
abode of one among themselves, and engage in agreeable discourse with
each other, such is called a sitting in company or a social gathering.
The subjects of discourse are to be the completion of verses half
composed by others, and the testing the knowledge of one another in the
various arts. The women who may be the most beautiful, who may like the
same things that the men like, and who may have power to attract the
minds of others, are here done homage to.


_Drinking Parties._

Men and women should drink in one another's houses. And here the men
should cause the public women to drink, and should then drink
themselves, liquors such as the Madhu, Aireya, Sara, and Asawa, which
are of bitter and sour taste; also drinks concocted from the barks of
various trees, wild fruits and leaves.


_Going to Gardens or Picnics._

In the forenoon, men, having dressed themselves should go to gardens on
horseback, accompanied by public women and followed by servants. And
having done there all the duties of the day, and passed the time in
various agreeable diversions, such as the fighting of quails, cocks and
rams, and other spectacles, they should return home in the afternoon in
the same manner, bringing with them bunches of flowers, &c.

The same also applies to bathing in summer in water from which wicked or
dangerous animals have previously been taken out, and which has been
built in on all sides.


_Other Social Diversions._

Spending nights playing with dice. Going out on moonlight nights.
Keeping the festive day in honour of spring. Plucking the sprouts and
fruits of the mangoe trees. Eating the fibres of lotuses. Eating the
tender ears of corn. Picnicing in the forests when the trees get their
new foliage. The Udakakashvedika or sporting in the water. Decorating
each other with the flowers of some trees. Pelting each other with the
flowers of the Kadamba tree, and many other sports which may either be
known to the whole country, or may be peculiar to particular parts of
it. These and similar other amusements should always be carried on by
citizens.

The above amusements should be followed by a person who diverts himself
alone in company with a courtesan, as well as by a courtesan who can do
the same in company with her maid servants or with citizens.

A Pithamarda[26] is a man without wealth, alone in the world, whose only
property consists of his Mallika,[27] some lathering, substance and a
red cloth, who comes from a good country, and who is skilled in all the
arts; and by teaching these arts is received in the company of citizens,
and in the abode of public women.

A Vita[28] is a man who has enjoyed the pleasures of fortune, who is a
compatriot of the citizens with whom he associates, who is possessed of
the qualities of a householder, who has his wife with him, and who is
honoured in the assembly of citizens, and in the abodes of public women,
and lives on their means and on them.

A Vidushaka[29] (also called a Vaihasaka, _i.e._, one who provokes
laughter) is a person only acquainted with some of the arts who is a
jester, and who is trusted by all.

These persons are employed in matters of quarrels and reconciliations
between citizens and public women.

This remark applies also to female beggars, to women with their heads
shaved, to adulterous women, and to old public women skilled in all the
various arts.

Thus a citizen living in his town or village, respected by all, should
call on the persons of his own caste who may be worth knowing. He should
converse in company and gratify his friends by his society, and obliging
others by his assistance in various matters, he should cause them to
assist one another in the same way.

There are some verses on this subject as follows:--

A citizen discoursing, not entirely in the Sanscrit language,[30] nor
wholly in the dialects of the country, on various topics in society,
obtains great respect. The wise should not resort to a society disliked
by the public, governed by no rules, and intent on the destruction of
others. But a learned man living in a society which acts according to
the wishes of the people, and which has pleasure for its only object is
highly respected in this world.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 13: This term would appear to apply generally to an inhabitant
of Hindoostan. It is not meant only for a dweller in a city, like the
Latin Urbanus as opposed to Rusticus.]

[Footnote 14: Gift is peculiar to a Brahman, conquest to a Kshatrya,
while purchase, deposit, and other means of acquiring wealth belongs to
the Vaishya.]

[Footnote 15: Natural garden flowers.]

[Footnote 16: Such as quails, partridges, parrots, starlings, &c.]

[Footnote 17: The calls of nature always performed by the Hindoos the
first thing in the morning.]

[Footnote 18: A colour made from lac.]

[Footnote 19: This would act instead of soap, which was not introduced
until the rule of the Mahomedans.]

[Footnote 20: Ten days are allowed when the hair is taken out with a pair
of pincers.]

[Footnote 21: These are characters generally introduced in the Hindoo
drama; their characteristics will be explained further on.]

[Footnote 22: Noonday sleep is only allowed in summer, when the nights
are short.]

[Footnote 23: These are very common in all parts of India.]

[Footnote 24: In the 'Asiatic Miscellany,' and in Sir W. Jones's works,
will be found a spirited hymn addressed to this goddess, who is adored
as the patroness of the fine arts, especially of music and rhetoric, as
the inventress of the Sanscrit language, &c., &c. She is the goddess of
harmony, eloquence, and language, and is somewhat analogous to Minerva.
For further information about her, see Edward Moor's 'Hindoo Pantheon.']

[Footnote 25: The public women, or courtesans (Vesya), of the early
Hindoos have often been compared with the Hetera of the Greeks. The
subject is dealt with at some length in H. H. Wilson's 'Select Specimens
of the Theatre of the Hindoos,' in two volumes, Trubner & Co., 1871. It
may be fairly considered that the courtesan was one of the elements, and
an important element too, of early Hindoo society, and that her
education and intellect were both superior to that of the women of the
household. Wilson says, "By the Vesya or courtesan, however, we are not
to understand a female who has disregarded the obligation of law or the
precepts of virtue, but a character reared by a state of manners
unfriendly to the admission of wedded females into society, and opening
it only at the expense of reputation to women who were trained for
association with men by personal and mental acquirements to which the
matron was a stranger."]

[Footnote 26: According to this description a Pithamarda would be a sort
of professor of all the arts, and as such received as the friend and
confidant of the citizens.]

[Footnote 27: A seat in the form of the letter T.]

[Footnote 28: The Vita is supposed to represent somewhat the character
of the Parasite of the Greek comedy. It is possible that he was retained
about the person of the wealthy and dissipated as a kind of private
instructor, as well as an entertaining companion.]

[Footnote 29: Vidushaka is evidently the buffoon and jester. Wilson says
of him that he is the humble companion, not the servant, of a prince or
man of rank, and it is a curious peculiarity that he is always a
Brahman. He bears more affinity to Sancho Panza, perhaps, than any other
character in western fiction, imitating him in his combination of
shrewdness and simplicity, his fondness of good living and his love of
ease. In the dramas of intrigue he exhibits some of the talents of
Mercury, but with less activity and ingenuity, and occasionally suffers
by his interference. According to the technical definition of his
attributes he is to excite mirth by being ridiculous in person, age, and
attire.]

[Footnote 30: This means, it is presumed, that the citizen should be
acquainted with several languages. The middle part of this paragraph
might apply to the Nihilists and Fenians of the day, or to secret
societies. It was perhaps a reference to the Thugs.]




CHAPTER V.

ABOUT THE KINDS OF WOMEN RESORTED TO BY THE CITIZENS, AND OF FRIENDS AND
MESSENGERS.


When Kama is practised by men of the four castes according to the rules
of the Holy Writ (_i.e._, by lawful marriage) with virgins of their own
caste, it then becomes a means of acquiring lawful progeny and good
fame, and it is not also opposed to the customs of the world. On the
contrary the practice of Kama with women of the higher castes, and with
those previously enjoyed by others, even though they be of the same
caste, is prohibited. But the practice of Kama with women of the lower
castes, with women excommunicated from their own caste, with public
women, and with women twice married,[31] is neither enjoined nor
prohibited. The object of practising Kama with such women is pleasure
only.

Nayikas,[32] therefore, are of three kinds, viz., maids, women twice
married, and public women. Gonikaputra has expressed an opinion that
there is a fourth kind of Nayika, viz., a woman who is resorted to on
some special occasion even though she be previously married to another.
These special occasions are when a man thinks thus:--

     (_a_). This woman is self-willed, and has been previously enjoyed
              by many others besides myself. I may, therefore, safely
              resort to her as to a public woman though she belongs to a
              higher caste than mine, and in so doing I shall not be
              violating the ordinances of
              Dharma.

Or thus:--

     (_b_). This is a twice-married woman and has been enjoyed by others
              before me, there is, therefore, no objection to my
              resorting to her.

Or thus:--

     (_c_). This woman has gained the heart of her great and powerful
              husband, and exercises a mastery over him, who is a friend
              of my enemy; if, therefore, she becomes united with me,
              she will cause her husband to abandon my enemy.

Or thus:--

     (_d_). This woman will turn the mind of her husband, who is very
              powerful, in my favour, he being at present disaffected
              towards me, and intent on doing me some harm.

Or thus:--

     (_e_). By making this woman my friend I shall gain the object of
              some friend of mine, or shall be able to effect the ruin
              of some enemy, or shall accomplish some other difficult
              purpose.

Or thus:--

     (_f_). By being united with this woman, I shall kill her husband,
              and so obtain his vast riches which I covet.

Or thus:--

     (_g_). The union of this woman with me is not attended with any
              danger, and will bring me wealth, of which, on account of
              my poverty and inability to support myself, I am very much
              in need. I shall, therefore, obtain her vast riches in
              this way without any difficulty.

Or thus:--

     (_h_). This woman loves me ardently, and knows all my weak points,
              if therefore, I am unwilling to be united with her, she
              will make my faults public, and thus tarnish my character
              and reputation. Or she will bring some gross accusation
              against me, of which it may be hard to clear myself, and I
              shall be ruined. Or perhaps she will detach from me her
              husband, who is powerful, and yet under her control, and
              will unite him to my enemy, or will herself join the latter.

Or thus:--

     (_i_). The husband of this woman has violated the chastity of my
              wives, I shall therefore return that injury by seducing
              his wives.

Or thus:--

     (_j_). By the help of this woman I shall kill an enemy of the king,
              who has taken shelter with her, and whom I am ordered by
              the king to destroy.

Or thus:

     (_k_). The woman whom I love is under the control of this woman. I
              shall, through the influence of the latter, be able to get
              at the former.

Or thus:--

     (_l_). This woman will bring to me a maid, who possesses wealth and
              beauty, but who is hard to get at, and under the control
              of another.

Or, lastly, thus:--

     (_m_). My enemy is a friend of this woman's husband, I shall
              therefore cause her to join him, and will thus create an
              enmity between her husband and him.

For these and similar other reasons the wives of other men may be
resorted to, but it must be distinctly understood that is only allowed
for special reasons, and not for mere carnal desire.

Charayana thinks that under these circumstances there is also a fifth
kind of Nayika, viz., a woman who is kept by a minister, and who repairs
to him occasionally; or a widow who accomplishes the purpose of a man
with the person to whom she resorts.

Suvarnanabha adds that a woman who passes the life of an ascetic and in
the condition of a widow may be considered as a sixth kind of Nayika.

Ghotakamukha says that the daughter of a public woman, and a female
servant, who are still virgins, form a seventh kind of Nayika.

Gonardiya puts forth his doctrine that any woman born of good family,
after she has come of age, is an eighth kind of Nayika.

But these four latter kinds of Nayikas do not differ much from the first
four kinds of them, as there is no separate object in resorting to
them. Therefore Vatsyayana is of opinion that there are only four kinds
of Nayikas, _i.e._, the maid, the twice married woman, the public woman,
and the woman resorted to for a special purpose.

The following women are not to be enjoyed:--

A leper.

A lunatic.

A woman turned out of caste.

A woman who reveals secrets.

A woman who publicly expresses desire for sexual intercourse.

A woman who is extremely white.

A woman who is extremely black.

A bad-smelling woman.

A woman who is a near relation.

A woman who is a female friend.

A woman who leads the life of an ascetic.

And, lastly, the wife of a relation, of a friend, of a learned Brahman,
and of the king.

The followers of Babhravya say that any woman who has been enjoyed by
five men is a fit and proper person to be enjoyed. But Gonikaputra is of
opinion that even when this is the case, the wives of a relation, of a
learned Brahman and of a king should be excepted.

The following are the kind of friends:--

One who has played with you in the dust, _i.e._, in childhood.

One who is bound by an obligation.

One who is of the same disposition and fond of the same things.

One who is a fellow student.

One who is acquainted with your secrets and faults, and whose faults and
secrets are also known to you.

One who is a child of your nurse.

One who is brought up with you.

One who is an hereditary friend.

These friends should possess the following qualities:--

They should tell the truth.

They should not be changed by time.

They should be favourable to your designs.

They should be firm.

They should be free from covetousness.

They should not be capable of being gained over by others.

They should not reveal your secrets.

Charayana says that citizens form friendship with washermen, barbers,
cowherds, florists, druggists, betel-leaf sellers, tavern keepers,
beggars, Pithamardas, Vitas and Vidushekas, as also with the wives of
all these people.

A messenger should possess the following qualities:--

Skilfulness.

Boldness.

Knowledge of the intention of men by their outward signs.

Absence of confusion, _i.e._, no shyness.

Knowledge of the exact meaning of what others do or say.

Good manners.

Knowledge of appropriate times and places for doing different things.

Ingenuity in business.

Quick comprehension.

Quick application of remedies, _i.e._, quick and ready resources.

And this part ends with a verse:--

The man who is ingenious and wise, who is accompanied by a friend, and
who knows the intentions of others, as also the proper time and place
for doing everything, can gain over, very easily, even a woman who is
very hard to be obtained.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 31: This term does not apply to a widow, but to a woman who
had probably left her husband, and is living with some other person as a
married woman, maritalement, as they say in France.]

[Footnote 32: Any woman fit to be enjoyed without sin. The object of the
enjoyment of women is twofold, viz., pleasure and progeny. Any woman who
can be enjoyed without sin for the purpose of accomplishing either the
one or the other of these two objects is a Nayika. The fourth kind of
Nayika which Vatsya admits further on is neither enjoyed for pleasure or
for progeny, but merely for accomplishing some special purpose in hand.
The word Nayika is retained as a technical term throughout.]

=END OF PART I.=




PART II.

OF SEXUAL UNION.




CHAPTER I.

KINDS OF SEXUAL UNION ACCORDING TO

     (_a_) DIMENSIONS.
     (_b_) FORCE OF DESIRE OR PASSION.
     (_c_) TIME.

_Kinds of Union._

Man is divided into three classes, viz., the hare man, the bull man, and
the horse man, according to the size of his lingam.

Woman also, according to the depth of her yoni, is either a female deer,
a mare, or a female elephant.

There are thus three equal unions between persons of corresponding
dimensions, and there are six unequal unions, when the dimensions do not
correspond, or nine in all, as the following table shows:

   +--------------------+--------------------+
   |      EQUAL.        |      UNEQUAL.      |
   +--------------------+--------------------+
   |  MEN.  |   WOMEN.  |  MEN.  | WOMEN.    |
   +--------+-----------+--------|-----------+
   |        |           |        |           |
   | Hare.  | Deer.     | Hare.  | Mare.     |
   | Bull.  | Mare.     | Hare.  | Elephant. |
   | Horse. | Elephant. | Bull.  | Deer.     |
   |        |           | Bull.  | Elephant. |
   |        |           | Horse. | Deer.     |
   |        |           | Horse. | Mare.     |
   +--------+-----------+--------+-----------+

In these unequal unions, when the male exceeds the female in point of
size, his union with a woman who is immediately next to him in size is
called high union, and is of two kinds; while his union with the woman
most remote from him in size is called the highest union, and is of one
kind only. On the other hand when the female exceeds the male in point
of size, her union with a man immediately next to her in size is called
low union, and is of two kinds; while her union with a man most remote
from her in size is called the lowest union, and is of one kind only.

In other words, the horse and mare, the bull and deer, form the high
union, while the horse and deer form the highest union. On the female
side, the elephant and bull, the mare and hare, form low unions, while
the elephant and the hare make the lowest unions.

There are then, nine kinds of union according to dimensions. Amongst all
these, equal unions are the best, those of a superlative degree, _i.e._,
the highest and the lowest, are the worst, and the rest are middling,
and with them the high[33] are better than the low.

There are also nine kinds of union according to the force of passion or
carnal desire, as follows:

   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   |    MEN.   |   WOMEN.  |    MEN.   |   WOMEN.  |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------|-----------+
   |           |           |           |           |
   | Small.    | Small.    | Small.    | Middling. |
   | Middling. | Middling. | Small.    | Intense.  |
   | Intense.  | Intense.  | Middling. | Small.    |
   |           |           | Middling. | Intense.  |
   |           |           | Intense.  | Small.    |
   |           |           | Intense.  | Middling. |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

A man is called a man of small passion whose desire at the time of
sexual union is not great, whose semen is scanty, and who cannot bear
the warm embraces of the female.

Those who differ from this temperament are called men of middling
passion, while those of intense passion are full of desire.

In the same way, women are supposed to have the three degrees of feeling
as specified above.

Lastly, according to time there are three kinds of men and women, viz.,
the short-timed, the moderate-timed, and the long-timed, and of these as
in the previous statements, there are nine kinds of union.

But on this last head there is a difference of opinion about the female,
which should be stated.

Auddalika says, "Females do not emit as males do. The males simply
remove their desire, while the females, from their consciousness of
desire, feel a certain kind of pleasure, which gives them satisfaction,
but it is impossible for them to tell you what kind of pleasure they
feel. The fact from which this becomes evident is, that males, when
engaged in coition, cease of themselves after emission, and are
satisfied, but it is not so with females."

This opinion is, however, objected to on the grounds that if a male be a
long-timed, the female loves him the more, but if he be short-timed, she
is dissatisfied with him. And this circumstance, some say, would prove
that the female emits also.

But this opinion does not hold good, for if it takes a long time to
allay a woman's desire, and during this time she is enjoying great
pleasure, it is quite natural then that she should wish for its
continuation. And on this subject there is a verse as follows:

"By union with men the lust, desire, or passion of women is satisfied,
and the pleasure derived from the consciousness of it is called their
satisfaction."

The followers of Babhravya, however, say that the semen of women
continues to fall from the beginning of the sexual union to its end, and
it is right that it should be so, for if they had no semen there would
be no embryo.

To this there is an objection. In the beginning of coition the passion
of the woman is middling, and she cannot bear the vigorous thrusts of
her lover, but by degrees her passion increases until she ceases to
think about her body, and then finally she wishes to stop from further
coition.

This objection, however, does not hold good, for even in ordinary things
that revolve with great force, such as a potter's wheel, or a top, we
find that the motion at first is slow, but by degrees it becomes very
rapid. In the same way the passion of the woman having gradually
increased, she has a desire to discontinue coition, when all the semen
has fallen away. And there is a verse with regard to this as follows:

"The fall of the semen of the man takes place only at the end of
coition, while the semen of the woman falls continually, and after the
semen of both has all fallen away then they wish for the discontinuance
of coition."[34]

Lastly, Vatsyayana is of opinion that the semen of the female falls in
the same way as that of the male.

Now some may ask here: If men and women are beings of the same kind, and
are engaged in bringing about the same result, why should they have
different works to do.

Vatsya says that this is so, because the ways of working as well as the
consciousness of pleasure in men and women are different. The difference
in the ways of working, by which men are the actors, and women are the
persons acted upon, is owing to the nature of the male and the female,
otherwise the actor would be sometimes the person acted upon, and vice
vers√¢. And from this difference in the ways of working follows the
difference in the consciousness of pleasure, for a man thinks, "this
woman is united with me," and a woman thinks, "I am united with this
man."

It may be said that if the ways of working in men and women are
different, why should not there be a difference, even in the pleasure
they feel, and which is the result of those ways.

But this objection is groundless, for the person acting and the person
acted upon being of different kinds, there is a reason for the
difference in their ways of working; but there is no reason for any
difference in the pleasure they feel, because they both naturally derive
pleasure from the act they perform.[35]

On this again some may say that when different persons are engaged in
doing the same work, we find that they accomplish the same end or
purpose: while, on the contrary, in the case of men and women we find
that each of them accomplishes his or her own end separately, and this
is inconsistent. But this is a mistake, for we find that sometimes two
things are done at the same time, as for instance in the fighting of
rams, both the rams receive the shock at the same time on their heads.
Again, in throwing one wood apple against another, and also in a fight
or struggle of wrestlers. If it be said that in these cases the things
employed are of the same kind, it is answered that even in the case of
men and women, the nature of the two persons is the same. And as the
difference in their ways of working arises from the difference of their
conformation only, it follows that men experience the same kind of
pleasure as women do.

There is also a verse on this subject as follows: "Men and women being
of the same nature, feel the same kind of pleasure, and therefore a man
should marry such a woman as will love him ever afterwards."

The pleasure of men and women being thus proved to be of the same kind,
it follows that in regard to time, there are nine kinds of sexual
intercourse, in the same way as there are nine kinds, according to the
force of passion.

There being thus nine kinds of union with regard to dimensions, force of
passion, and time, respectively, by making combinations of them,
innumerable kinds of union would be produced. Therefore in each
particular kind of sexual union, men should use such means as they may
think suitable for the occasion.[36]

At the first time of sexual union the passion of the male is intense,
and his time is short, but in subsequent unions on the same day the
reverse of this is the case. With the female, however, it is the
contrary, for at the first time her passion is weak, and then her time
long, but on subsequent occasions on the same day, her passion is
intense and her time short, until her passion is satisfied.


_On the different kinds of Love._

Men learned in the humanities are of opinion that love is of four kinds,
viz.:

1. Love acquired by continual habit.

2. Love resulting from the imagination.

3. Love resulting from belief.

4. Love resulting from the perception of external objects.

(1). Love resulting from the constant and continual performance and
habit, as for instance the love of sexual intercourse, the love of
hunting, the love of drinking, the love of gambling, etc., etc.

(2). Love which is felt for things to which we are not habituated, and
which proceeds entirely from ideas, is called love resulting from
imagination, as for instance, that love which some men and women and
eunuchs feel for the Auparishtaka or mouth congress, and that which is
felt by all for such things as embracing, kissing, etc., etc.

(3). The love which is mutual on both sides, and proved to be true, when
each looks upon the other as his or her very own, such is called love
resulting from belief by the learned.

(4). The love resulting from the perception of eternal objects is quite
evident and well-known to the world, because the pleasure which it
affords is superior to the pleasure of the other kinds of love, which
exists only for its sake.

What has been said in this chapter upon the subject of sexual union is
sufficient for the learned; but for the edification of the ignorant, the
same will now be treated of at length and in detail.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 33: High unions are said to be better than low ones, for in
the former it is possible for the male to satisfy his own passion
without injuring the female, while in the latter it is difficult for the
female to be satisfied by any means.]

[Footnote 34: The strength of passion with women varies a great deal,
some being easily satisfied, and others eager and willing to go on for a
long time. To satisfy these last thoroughly a man must have recourse to
art. It is certain that a fluid flows from the woman in larger or
smaller quantities, but her satisfaction is not complete until she has
experienced the "spasme g√©n√™sique," as described in a French work
recently published and called "Breviare de l'Amour Experimental par le
Dr. Jules Guyot."]

[Footnote 35: This is a long dissertation very common among Sanscrit
authors, both when writing and talking socially. They start certain
propositions, and then argue for and against them. What it is presumed
the author means, is, that though both men and women derive pleasure
from the act of coition, the way it is produced is brought about by
different means, each individual performing his own work in the matter,
irrespective of the other, and each deriving individually their own
consciousness of pleasure from the act they perform. There is a
difference in the work that each does, and a difference in the
consciousness of pleasure that each has, but no difference in the
pleasure they feel, for each feels that pleasure to a greater or lesser
degree.]

[Footnote 36: This paragraph should be particularly noted, for it
specially applies to married men and their wives. So many men utterly
ignore the feelings of the women, and never pay the slightest attention
to the passion of the latter. To understand the subject thoroughly, it
is absolutely necessary to study it, and then a person will know that,
as dough is prepared for baking, so must a woman be prepared for sexual
intercourse, if she is to derive satisfaction from it.]




CHAPTER II.

OF THE EMBRACE.


This part of the Kama Shastra, which treats of sexual union, is also
called "Sixty-four" (Chatushshashti). Some old authors say that it is
called so, because it contains sixty-four chapters. Others are of
opinion that the author of this part being a person named Panchala, and
the person who recited the part of the Rig Veda called Dashatapa, which
contains sixty-four verses, being also called Panchala, the name
"sixty-four" has been given to the part of the work in honour of the Rig
Vedas. The followers of Babhravya say on the other hand that this part
contains eight subjects, viz., the embrace, kissing, scratching with the
nails or fingers, biting, lying down, making various sounds, playing the
part of a man, and the Auparishtaka, or mouth congress. Each of these
subjects being of eight kinds, and eight multiplied by eight being
sixty-four, this part is therefore named "sixty-four." But Vatsyayana
affirms that as this part contains also the following subjects, viz.,
striking, crying, the acts of a man during congress, the various kinds
of congress, and other subjects, the name "sixty-four" is given to it
only accidentally. As, for instance, we say this tree is "Saptaparna,"
or seven-leaved, this offering of rice is "Panchavarna," or
five-coloured, but the tree has not seven leaves, neither has the rice
five colours.

However the part sixty-four is now treated of, and the embrace, being
the first subject, will now be considered.

Now the embrace which indicates the mutual love of a man and woman who
have come together is of four kinds, viz.:

   Touching.
   Piercing.
   Rubbing.
   Pressing.

The action in each case is denoted by the meaning of the word which
stands for it.

(1). When a man under some pretext or other goes in front or alongside
of a woman and touches her body with his own, it is called the "touching
embrace."

(2). When a woman in a lonely place bends down, as if to pick up
something, and pierces, as it were, a man sitting or standing, with her
breasts, and the man in return takes hold of them, it is called a
"piercing embrace."

The above two kinds of embrace takes place only between persons who do
not, as yet, speak freely with each other.

(3). When two lovers are walking slowly together, either in the dark, or
in a place of public resort, or in a lonely place, and rub their bodies
against each other, it is called a "rubbing embrace."

(4). When on the above occasion one of them presses the other's body
forcibly against a wall or pillar, it is called a "pressing embrace."

These two last embraces are peculiar to those who know the intentions of
each other.

At the time of the meeting the four following kinds of embrace are used,
viz.:

_Jataveshtitaka_, or the twining of a creeper.

_Vrikshadhirudhaka_, or climbing a tree.

_Tila-Tandulaka_, or the mixture of sesamum seed with rice.

_Kshiraniraka_, or milk and water embrace.

(1). When a woman, clinging to a man as a creeper twines round a tree,
bends his head down to hers with the desire of kissing him and slightly
makes the sound of sut sut, embraces him, and looks lovingly towards
him, it is called an embrace like the "twining of a creeper."

(2). When a woman, having placed one of her feet on the foot of her
lover, and the other on one of his thighs, passes one of her arms round
his back, and the other on his shoulders, makes slightly the sounds of
singing and cooing, and wishes, as it were, to climb up him in order to
have a kiss, it is called an embrace like the "climbing of a tree."

These two kinds of embrace take place when the lover is standing.

(3). When lovers lie on a bed, and embrace each other so closely that
the arms and thighs of the one are encircled by the arms and thighs of
the other, and are, as it were, rubbing up against them, this is called
an embrace like "the mixture of sesamum seed with rice."

(4). When a man and a woman are very much in love with each other, and
not thinking of any pain or hurt, embrace each other as if they were
entering into each other's bodies, either while the woman is sitting on
the lap of the man or in front of him, or on a bed, then it is called an
embrace like a "mixture of milk and water."

These two kinds of embrace take place at the time of sexual union.

Babhravya has thus related to us the above eight kinds of embraces.

Suvarnanabha, moreover, gives us four ways of embracing simple members
of the body, which are:

The embrace of the thighs.

The embrace of the jaghana, _i.e._, the part of the body from the navel
downwards to the thighs.

The embrace of the breasts.

The embrace of the forehead.

(1). When one of two lovers presses forcibly one or both of the thighs
of the other between his or her own, it is called the "embrace of
thighs."

(2). When a man presses the jaghana or middle part of the woman's body
against his own, and mounts upon her to practise, either scratching with
the nail or finger, or biting, or striking, or kissing, the hair of the
woman being loose and flowing, it is called the "embrace of the
jaghana."

(3). When a man places his breast between the breasts of a woman, and
presses her with it, it is called the "embrace of the breasts."

(4). When either of the lovers touches the mouth, the eyes and the
forehead of the other with his or her own, it is called the "embrace of
the forehead."

Some say that even shampooing is a kind of embrace, because there is a
touching of bodies in it. But Vatsyayana thinks that shampooing is
performed at a different time, and for a different purpose, and it is
also of a different character, it cannot be said to be included in the
embrace.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows: "The whole subject
of embracing is of such a nature that men who ask questions about it, or
who hear about it, or who talk about it, acquire thereby a desire for
enjoyment. Even those embraces that are not mentioned in the Kama
Shastra should be practised at the time of sexual enjoyment, if they are
in any way conducive to the increase of love or passion. The rules of
the Shastra apply so long as the passion of man is middling, but when
the wheel of love is once set in motion, there is then no Shastra and no
order."




CHAPTER III.

ON KISSING.


It is said by some that there is no fixed time or order between the
embrace, the kiss, and the pressing or scratching with the nails or
fingers, but that all these things should be done generally before
sexual union takes place, while striking and making the various sounds
generally takes place at the time of the union. Vatsyayana, however,
thinks that anything may take place at any time, for love does not care
for time or order.

On the occasion of the first congress, kissing and the other things
mentioned above should be done moderately, they should not be continued
for a long time, and should be done alternately. On subsequent
occasions, however, the reverse of all this may take place, and
moderation will not be necessary, they may continue for a long time, and
for the purpose of kindling love, they may be all done at the same time.

The following are the places for kissing, viz., the forehead, the eyes,
the cheeks, the throat, the bosom, the breasts, the lips, and the
interior of the mouth. Moreover, the people of the Lat country kiss also
on the following places, viz., the joints of the thighs, the arms, and
the navel. But Vatsyayana thinks that though kissing is practised by
these people in the above places on account of the intensity of their
love, and the customs of their country, it is not fit to be practised by
all.

Now in a case of a young girl there are three sort of kisses, viz.:

   The nominal kiss.
   The throbbing kiss.
   The touching kiss.

(1). When a girl only touches the mouth of her lover with her own, but
does not herself do anything, it is called the "nominal kiss."

(2). When a girl, setting aside her bashfulness a little, wishes to
touch the lip that is pressed into her mouth, and with that object
moves her lower lip, but not the upper one, it is called the "throbbing
kiss."

(3). When a girl touches her lover's lip with her tongue, and having
shut her eyes, places her hands on those of her lover, it is called the
"touching kiss."

Other authors describe four other kinds of kisses, viz.:

   The straight kiss.
   The bent kiss.
   The turned kiss.
   The pressed kiss.

(1). When the lips of two lovers are brought into direct contact with
each other, it is called a "straight kiss."

(2). When the heads of two lovers are bent towards each other, and when
so bent kissing takes place, it is called a "bent kiss."

(3). When one of them turns up the face of the other by holding the head
and chin, and then kissing, it is called a "turned kiss."

(4). Lastly, when the lower lip is pressed with much force, it is called
a "pressed kiss."

There is also a fifth kind of kiss called the "greatly pressed kiss,"
which is effected by taking hold of the lower lip between two fingers,
and then after touching it with the tongue, pressing it with great force
with the lip.

As regards kissing, a wager may be laid as to which will get hold of the
lips of the other first. If the woman loses, she should pretend to cry,
should keep her lover off by shaking her hands, and turn away from him
and dispute with him, saying "let another wager be laid." If she loses
this a second time, she should appear doubly distressed, and when her
lover is off his guard or asleep, she should get hold of his lower lip,
and hold it in her teeth, so that it should not slip away, and then she
should laugh, make a loud noise, deride him, dance about, and say
whatever she likes in a joking way, moving her eyebrows, and rolling her
eyes. Such are the wagers and quarrels as far as kissing is concerned,
but the same may be applied with regard to the pressing or scratching
with the nails and fingers, biting and striking. All these, however, are
only peculiar to men and women of intense passion.

When a man kisses the upper lip of a woman, while she in return kisses
his lower lip, it is called the "kiss of the upper lip."

When one of them takes both the lips of the other between his or her
own, it is called "a clasping kiss." A woman, however, only takes this
kind of kiss from a man who has no moustache. And on the occasion of
this kiss, if one of them touches the teeth, the tongue, and the palate
of the other, with his or her tongue, it is called the "fighting of the
tongue." In the same way, the pressing of the teeth of the one against
the mouth of the other is to be practised.

Kissing is of four kinds, viz., moderate, contracted, pressed, and soft,
according to the different parts of the body which are kissed, for
different kinds of kisses are appropriate for different parts of the
body.

When a woman looks at the face of her lover while he is asleep, and
kisses it to show her intention or desire, it is called a "kiss that
kindles love."

When a woman kisses her lover while he is engaged in business, or while
he is quarrelling with her, or while he is looking at something else, so
that his mind may be turned away, it is called a "kiss that turns away."

When a lover coming home late at night kisses his beloved, who is asleep
or in bed, in order to show her his desire, it is called a "kiss that
awakens." On such an occasion the woman may pretend to be asleep at the
time of her lover's arrival, so that she may know his intention and
obtain respect from him.

When a person kisses the reflection of the person he loves in a mirror,
in water, or on a wall, it is called a "kiss showing the intention."

When a person kisses a child sitting on his lap, or a picture, or an
image, or figure, in the presence of the person beloved by him, it is
called a "transferred kiss."

When at night at a theatre, or in an assembly of caste men, a man coming
up to a woman kisses a finger of her hand if she be standing, or a toe
of her foot if she be sitting, or when a woman is shampooing her lover's
body, places her face on his thigh (as if she was sleepy) so as to
inflame his passion, and kisses his thigh or great toe, it is called a
"demonstrative kiss."

There is also a verse on the subject as follows:--

"Whatever things may be done by one of the lovers to the other, the same
should be returned by the other, _i.e._, if the woman kisses him he should
kiss her in return, if she strikes him he should also strike her in
return."




CHAPTER IV.

ON PRESSING, OR MARKING, OR SCRATCHING WITH THE NAILS.


When love becomes intense, pressing with the nails or scratching the
body with them is practised, and it is done on the following occasions:
On the first visit; at the time of setting out on a journey; on the
return from a journey; at the time when an angry lover is reconciled;
and lastly when the woman is intoxicated.

But pressing with the nails is not an usual thing except with those who
are intensely passionate, _i.e._, full of passion. It is employed together
with biting, by those to whom the practice is agreeable.

Pressing with the nails is of the eight following kinds, according to
the forms of the marks which are produced, viz.:

1. Sounding.

2. Half moon.

3. A circle.

4. A line.

5. A tiger's nail or claw.

6. A peacock's foot.

7. The jump of a hare.

8. The leaf of a blue lotus.

The places that are to be pressed with the nails are as follows: the arm
pit, the throat, the breasts, the lips, the jaghana, or middle parts of
the body, and the thighs. But Suvarnanabha is of opinion that when the
impetuosity of passion is excessive, then the places need not be
considered.

The qualities of good nails are that they should be bright, well set,
clean, entire, convex, soft, and glossy in appearance. Nails are of
three kinds according to their size, viz.:

   Small.
   Middling.
   Large.

Large nails, which give grace to the hands, and attract the hearts of
women from their appearance, are possessed by the Bengalees.

Small nails, which can be used in various ways, and are to be applied
only with the object of giving pleasure, are possessed by the people of
the southern districts.

Middling nails, which contain the properties of both the above kinds,
belong to the people of the Maharashtra.

(1). When a person presses the chin, the breasts, the lower lip, or the
jaghana of another so softly that no scratch or mark is left, but only
the hair on the body becomes erect from the touch of the nails, and the
nails themselves make a sound, it is called a "sounding or pressing with
the nails."

This pressing is used in the case of a young girl when her lover
shampoos her, scratches her head, and wants to trouble or frighten her.

(2). The curved mark with the nails, which is impressed on the neck and
the breasts, is called the "half moon."

(3). When the half moons are impressed opposite to each other, it is
called a "circle." This mark with the nails is generally made on the
navel, the small cavities about the buttocks, and on the joints of the
thigh.

(4). A mark in the form of a small line, and which can be made on any
part of the body, is called a "line."

(5). This same line, when it is curved, and made on the breast, is
called a "tiger's nail."

(6). When a curved mark is made on the breast by means of the five
nails, it is called a "peacock's foot." This mark is made with the
object of being praised, for it requires a great deal of skill to make
it properly.

(7). When five marks with the nails are made close to one another near
the nipple of the breast, it is called "the jump of a hare."

(8). A mark made on the breast or on the hips in the form of a leaf of
the blue lotus, is called the "leaf of a blue lotus."

When a person is going on a journey, and makes a mark on the thighs, or
on the breast, it is called a "token of remembrance." On such an
occasion three or four lines are impressed close to one another with the
nails.

Here ends the marking with the nails. Marks of other kinds than the
above may also be made with the nails, for the ancient authors say,
that as there are innumerable degrees of skill among men (the practice
of this art being known to all), so there are innumerable ways of making
these marks. And as pressing or marking with the nails is independent of
love, no one can say with certainty how many different kinds of marks
with the nails do actually exist. The reason of this is, Vatsyayana
says, that as variety is necessary in love, so love is to be produced by
means of variety. It is on this account that courtezans, who are well
acquainted with various ways and means, become so desirable, for if
variety is sought in all the arts and amusements, such as archery and
others, how much more should it be sought after in the present case.

The marks of the nails should not be made on married women, but
particular kinds of marks may be made on their private parts for the
remembrance and increase of love.

There are also some verses on the subject, as follows:

"The love of a woman who sees the marks of nails on the private parts of
her body, even though they are old and almost worn out, becomes again
fresh and new. If there be no marks of nails to remind a person of the
passages of love, then love is lessened in the same way as when no union
takes place for a long time."

Even when a stranger sees at a distance a young woman with the marks of
nails on her breast,[37] he is filled with love and respect for her.

A man, also, who carries the marks of nails and teeth on some parts of
his body, influences the mind of a woman, even though it be ever so
firm. In short, nothing tends to increase love so much as the effects of
marking with the nails, and biting.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 37: From this it would appear that in ancient times the
breasts of women were not covered, and this is seen in the painting of
the Ajunta and other caves, where we find that the breasts of even royal
ladies and others are exposed.]




CHAPTER V.

ON BITING, AND THE MEANS TO BE EMPLOYED WITH REGARD TO WOMEN OF
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES.


All the places that can be kissed, are also the places that can be
bitten, except the upper lip, the interior of the mouth, and the eyes.

The qualities of good teeth are as follows: They should be equal,
possessed of a pleasing brightness, capable of being coloured, of proper
proportions, unbroken, and with sharp ends.

The defects of teeth on the other hand are, that they are blunt,
protruding from the gums, rough, soft, large, and loosely set.

The following are the different kinds of biting, viz.:

   The hidden bite.
   The swollen bite.
   The point.
   The line of points.
   The coral and the jewel.
   The line of jewels.
   The broken cloud.
   The biting of the boar.

(1). The biting which is shown only by the excessive redness of the skin
that is bitten, is called the "hidden bite."

(2). When the skin is pressed down on both sides, it is called the
"swollen bite."

(3). When a small portion of the skin is bitten with two teeth only, it
is called the "point."

(4). When such small portions of the skin are bitten with all the teeth,
it is called the "line of points."

(5). The biting which is done by bringing together the teeth and the
lips, is called the "coral and the jewel." The lip is the coral, and the
teeth the jewel.

(6). When biting is done with all the teeth, it is called the "line of
jewels."

(7). The biting which consists of unequal risings in a circle, and which
comes from the space between the teeth, is called the "broken cloud."
This is impressed on the breasts.

(8). The biting which consists of many broad rows of marks near to one
another, and with red intervals, is called the "biting of a boar." This
is impressed on the breasts and the shoulders; and these two last modes
of biting are peculiar to persons of intense passion.

The lower lip is the place on which the "hidden bite," the "swollen
bite," and the "point" are made; again the "swollen bite," and the
"coral and the jewel" bite are done on the cheek. Kissing, pressing with
the nails, and biting are the ornaments of the left cheek, and when the
word cheek is used it is to be understood as the left cheek.

Both the "line of points" and the "line of jewels" are to be impressed
on the throat, the arm pit, and the joints of the thighs; but the "line
of points" alone is to be impressed on the forehead and the thighs.

The marking with the nails, and the biting of the following things,
viz., an ornament of the forehead, an ear ornament, a bunch of flowers,
a betel leaf, or a tamala leaf, which are worn by, or belong to the
woman that is beloved, are signs of the desire of enjoyment.

Here end the different kinds of biting.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the affairs of love a man should do such things as are agreeable to
the women of different countries.

The women of the central countries (_i.e._, between the Ganges and the
Jumna) are noble in their character, not accustomed to disgraceful
practices, and dislike pressing the nails and biting.

The women of the Balhika country are gained over by striking.

The women of Avantika are fond of foul pleasures, and have not good
manners.

The women of the Maharashtra are fond of practising the sixty-four arts,
they utter low and harsh words, and like to be spoken to in the same
way, and have an impetuous desire of enjoyment.

The women of Pataliputra (_i.e._, the modern Patna) are of the same nature
as the women of the Maharashtra, but show their likings only in secret.

The women of the Dravida country, though they are rubbed and pressed
about at the time of sexual enjoyment, have a slow fall of semen, that
is they are very slow in the act of coition.

The women of Vanavasi are moderately passionate, they go through every
kind of enjoyment, cover their bodies, and abuse those who utter low,
mean and harsh words.

The women of Avanti hate kissing, marking with the nails, and biting,
but they have a fondness for various kinds of sexual union.

The women of Malwa like embracing and kissing, but not wounding, and
they are gained over by striking.

The women of Abhira, and those of the country about the Indus and five
rivers (_i.e._, the Punjab), are gained over by the Auparishtaka or mouth
congress.

The women of Aparatika are full of passion, and make slowly the sound
"Sit."

The women of the Lat country have even more impetuous desire, and also
make the sound "Sit."

The women of the Stri Rajya, and of Koshola (Oude), are full of
impetuous desire, their semen falls in large quantities, and they are
fond of taking medicine to make it do so.

The women of the Audhra country have tender bodies, they are fond of
enjoyment, and have a liking for voluptuous pleasures.

The women of Ganda have tender bodies, and speak sweetly.

Now Suvarnanabha is of opinion that that which is agreeable to the
nature of a particular person, is of more consequence than that which is
agreeable to a whole nation, and that therefore the peculiarities of the
country should not be observed in such cases. The various pleasures, the
dress, and the sports of one country are in time borrowed by another,
and in such a case these things must be considered as belonging
originally to that country.

Among the things mentioned above, viz., embracing, kissing, etc., those
which increase passion should be done first, and those which are only
for amusement or variety should be done afterwards.

There are also some verses on this subject as follows:

"When a man bites a woman forcibly, she should angrily do the same to
him with double force. Thus a 'point' should be returned with a 'line of
points,' and a 'line of points' with a 'broken cloud,' and if she be
excessively chafed, she should at once begin a love quarrel with him. At
such a time she should take hold of her lover by the hair, and bend his
head down, and kiss his lower lip, and then, being intoxicated with
love, she should shut her eyes and bite him in various places. Even by
day, and in a place of public resort, when her lover shows her any mark
that she may have inflicted on his body, she should smile at the sight
of it, and turning her face as if she were going to chide him, she
should show him with an angry look the marks on her own body that have
been made by him. Thus if men and women act according to each other's
liking, their love for each other will not be lessened even in one
hundred years."




CHAPTER VI.

OF THE DIFFERENT WAYS OF LYING DOWN, AND VARIOUS KINDS OF CONGRESS.


On the occasion of a "high congress" the Mrigi (Deer) woman should lie
down in such a way as to widen her yoni, while in a "low congress" the
Hastini (Elephant) woman should lie down so as to contract hers. But in
an "equal congress" they should lie down in the natural position. What
is said above concerning the Mrigi and the Hastini applies also to the
Vadawa (Mare) woman. In a "low congress" the women should particularly
make use of medicine, to cause her desires to be satisfied quickly.

The Deer-woman has the following three ways of lying down.

   The widely opened position.
   The yawning position.
   The position of the wife of Indra.

(1). When she lowers her head and raises her middle parts, it is called
the "widely opened position." At such a time the man should apply some
unguent, so as to make the entrance easy.

(2). When she raises her thighs and keeps them wide apart and engages in
congress, it is called the "yawning position."

(3). When she places her thighs with her legs doubled on them upon her
sides, and thus engages in congress, it is called the position of
Indrani, and this is learnt only by practice. The position is also
useful in the case of the "highest congress."

The "clasping position" is used in "low congress," and in the "lowest
congress," together with the "pressing position," the "twining
position", and the "mare's position."

When the legs of both the male and the female are stretched straight
out over each other, it is called the "clasping position." It is of two
kinds, the side position and the supine position, according to the way
in which they lie down. In the side position the male should invariably
lie on his left side, and cause the woman to lie on her right side, and
this rule is to be observed in lying down with all kinds of women.

When, after congress has begun in the clasping position, the woman
presses her lover with her thighs, it is called the "pressing position."

When the woman places one of her thighs across the thigh of her lover,
it is called the "twining position."

When a woman forcibly holds in her yoni the lingam after it is in, it is
called the "mare's position." This is learnt by practice only, and is
chiefly found among the women of the Andra country.

The above are the different ways of lying down, mentioned by Babhravya;
Suvarnanabha, however, gives the following in addition.

When the female raises both of her thighs straight up, it is called the
"rising position."

When she raises both of her legs, and places them on her lover's
shoulders, it is called the "yawning position."

When the legs are contracted, and thus held by the lover before his
bosom, it is called the "pressed position."

When only one of her legs is stretched out, it is called the "half
pressed position."

When the woman places one of her legs on her lover's shoulder, and
stretches the other out, and then places the latter on his shoulder, and
stretches out the other, and continues to do so alternately, it is
called the "splitting of a bamboo."

When one of her legs is placed on the head, and the other is stretched
out, it is called the "fixing of a nail." This is learnt by practice
only.

When both the legs of the woman are contracted, and placed on her
stomach, it is called the "crab's position."

When the thighs are raised and placed one upon the other, it is called
the "packed position."

When the shanks are placed one upon the other, it is called the
"lotus-like position."

When a man, during congress, turns round, and enjoys the woman without
leaving her, while she embraces him round the back all the time, it is
called the "turning position," and is learnt only by practice.

Thus says Suvarnanabha, these different ways of lying down, sitting, and
standing should be practised in water, because it is easy to do so
therein. But Vatsyayana is of opinion that congress in water is
improper, because it is prohibited by the religious law.

When a man and a woman support themselves on each other's bodies, or on
a wall, or pillar, and thus while standing engage in congress, it is
called the "supported congress."

When a man supports himself against a wall, and the woman, sitting on
his hands joined together and held underneath her, throws her arms round
his neck, and putting her thighs alongside his waist, moves herself by
her feet, which are touching the wall against which the man is leaning,
it is called the "suspended congress."

When a woman stands on her hands and feet like a quadruped, and her
lover mounts her like a bull, it is called the "congress of a cow." At
this time everything that is ordinarily done on the bosom should be done
on the back.

In the same way can be carried on the congress of a dog, the congress of
a goat, the congress of a deer, the forcible mounting of an ass, the
congress of a cat, the jump of a tiger, the pressing of an elephant, the
rubbing of a boar, and the mounting of a horse. And in all these cases
the characteristics of these different animals should be manifested by
acting like them.

When a man enjoys two women at the same time, both of whom love him
equally, it is called the "united congress."

When a man enjoys many women altogether, it is called the "congress of a
herd of cows."

The following kinds of congress, viz., sporting in water, or the
congress of an elephant with many female elephants, which is said to
take place only in the water, the congress of a collection of goats, the
congress of a collection of deer, take place in imitation of these
animals.

In Gramaneri many young men enjoy a woman that may be married to one of
them, either one after the other, or at the same time. Thus one of them
holds her, another enjoys her, a third uses her mouth, a fourth holds
her middle part, and in this way they go on enjoying her several parts
alternately.

The same things can be done when several men are sitting in company with
one courtesan, or when one courtesan is alone with many men. In the same
way this can be done by the women of the King's harem when they
accidentally get hold of a man.

The people in the Southern countries have also a congress in the anus,
that is called the "lower congress."

Thus ends the various kinds of congress. There are also two verses on
the subject as follows.

"An ingenious person should multiply the kinds of congress after the
fashion of the different kinds of beasts and of birds. For these
different kinds of congress, performed according to the usage of each
country, and the liking of each individual, generate love, friendship,
and respect in the hearts of women."




CHAPTER VII.

OF THE VARIOUS MODES OF STRIKING, AND OF THE SOUNDS APPROPRIATE TO THEM.


Sexual intercourse can be compared to a quarrel, on account of the
contrarieties of love and its tendency to dispute. The place of striking
with passion is the body, and on the body the special places are:

   The shoulders.
   The head.
   The space between the breasts.
   The back.
   The jaghana, or middle part of the body.
   The sides.

Striking is of four kinds, viz.:

   Striking with the back of the hand.
   Striking with the fingers a little contracted.
   Striking with the fist.
   Striking with the open palm of the hand.

On account of its causing pain, striking gives rise to the hissing
sound, which is of various kinds, and to the eight kinds of crying,
viz.:

   The sound Hin.
   The thundering sound.
   The cooing sound.
   The weeping sound.
   The sound Phut.
   The sound Ph√¢t.
   The sound S√ªt.
   The sound Pl√¢t.

Besides these, there are also words having a meaning, such as "mother,"
and those that are expressive of prohibition, sufficiency, desire of
liberation, pain or praise, and to which may be added sounds like those
of the dove, the cuckoo, the green pigeon, the parrot, the bee, the
sparrow, the flamingo, the duck, and the quail, which are all
occasionally made use of.

Blows with the fist should be given on the back of the woman, while she
is sitting on the lap of the man, and she should give blows in return,
abusing the man as if she were angry, and making the cooing and the
weeping sounds. While the woman is engaged in congress the space between
the breasts should be struck with the back of the hand, slowly at first,
and then proportionately to the increasing excitement, until the end.

At this time the sounds Hin and others may be made, alternately or
optionally, according to habit. When the man, making the sound Ph√¢t,
strikes the woman on the head, with the fingers of his hand a little
contracted, it is called Prasritaka, which means striking with the
fingers of the hand a little contracted. In this case the appropriate
sounds are the cooing sound, the sound Ph√¢t, and the sound Phut in the
interior of the mouth, and at the end of congress the sighing and
weeping sounds. The sound Ph√¢t is an imitation of the sound of a bamboo
being split, while the sound Phut is like the sound made by something
falling into water. At all times when kissing and such like things are
begun, the woman should give a reply with a hissing sound. During the
excitement when the woman is not accustomed to striking, she continually
utters words expressive of prohibition, sufficiently, or desire of
liberation, as well as the words "father," "mother," intermingled with
the sighing, weeping and thundering sounds.[38] Towards the conclusion
of the congress, the breasts, the jaghana, and the sides of the woman
should be pressed with the open palms of the hand, with some force,
until the end of it, and then sounds like those of the quail, or the
goose should be made.

There are also two verses on the subject as follows:

"The characteristics of manhood are said to consist of roughness and
impetuosity, while weakness, tenderness, sensibility, and an inclination
to turn away from unpleasant things are the distinguishing marks of
womanhood. The excitement of passion, and peculiarities of habit may
sometimes cause contrary results to appear, but these do not last long,
and in the end the natural state is resumed."

The wedge on the bosom, the scissors on the head, the piercing
instrument on the cheeks, and the pinchers on the breasts and sides, may
also be taken into consideration with the other four modes of striking,
and thus give eight ways altogether. But these four ways of striking
with instruments are peculiar to the people of the southern countries,
and the marks caused by them are seen on the breasts of their women.
They are local peculiarities, but Vatsyayana is of opinion that the
practice of them is painful, barbarous, and base, and quite unworthy of
imitation.

In the same way anything that is a local peculiarity should not always
be adopted elsewhere, and even in the place where the practice is
prevalent, excess of it should always be avoided. Instances of the
dangerous use of them may be given as follows. The King of the Panchalas
killed the courtezan Madhavasena by means of the wedge during congress.
King Shatakarni Shatavahana of the Kuntalas deprived his great Queen
Malayavati of her life by a pair of scissors, and Naradeva, whose hand
was deformed, blinded a dancing girl by directing a piercing instrument
in a wrong way.

There are also two verses on the subject as follows:

"About these things there cannot be either enumeration or any definite
rule. Congress having once commenced, passion alone gives birth to all
the acts of the parties."

Such passionate actions and amorous gesticulations or movements, which
arise on the spur of the moment, and during sexual intercourse, cannot
be defined, and are as irregular as dreams. A horse having once attained
the fifth degree of motion goes on with blind speed, regardless of pits,
ditches, and posts in his way; and in the same manner a loving pair
become blind with passion in the heat of congress, and go on with great
impetuosity, paying not the least regard to excess. For this reason one
who is well acquainted with the science of love, and knowing his own
strength, as also the tenderness, impetuosity, and strength of the young
woman, should act accordingly. The various modes of enjoyment are not
for all times or for all persons, but they should only be used at the
proper time, and in the proper countries and places.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 38: Men who are well acquainted with the art of love are well
aware how often one woman differs from another in her sighs and sounds
during the time of congress. Some women like to be talked to in the most
loving way, others in the most abusive way, and so on. Some women enjoy
themselves with closed eyes in silence, others make a great noise over
it, and some almost faint away. The great art is to ascertain what gives
them the greatest pleasure, and what specialities they like best.]




CHAPTER VIII.

ABOUT WOMEN ACTING THE PART OF A MAN; AND OF THE WORK OF A MAN.


When a woman sees that her lover is fatigued by constant congress,
without having his desire satisfied, she should, with his permission,
lay him down upon his back, and give him assistance by acting his part.
She may also do this to satisfy the curiosity of her lover, or her own
desire of novelty.

There are two ways of doing this, the first is when during congress she
turns round, and gets on the top of her lover, in such a manner as to
continue the congress, without obstructing the pleasure of it; and the
other is when she acts the man's part from the beginning. At such a
time, with flowers in her hair hanging loose, and her smiles broken by
hard breathings, she should press upon her lover's bosom with her own
breasts, and lowering her head frequently, should do in return the same
actions which he used to do before, returning his blows and chaffing
him, should say, "I was laid down by you, and fatigued with hard
congress, I shall now therefore lay you down in return." She should then
again manifest her own bashfulness, her fatigue, and her desire of
stopping the congress. In this way she should do the work of a man,
which we shall presently relate.

Whatever is done by a man for giving pleasure to a woman is called the
work of a man, and is as follows:--

While the woman is lying on his bed, and is as it were abstracted by his
conversation, he should loosen the knot of her under garments, and when
she begins to dispute with him, he should overwhelm her with kisses.
Then when his lingam is erect he should touch her with his hands in
various places, and gently manipulate various parts of the body. If the
woman is bashful, and if it is the first time that they have come
together, the man should place his hands between her thighs, which she
would probably keep close together, and if she is a very young girl, he
should first get his hands upon her breasts, which she would probably
cover with her own hands, and under her armpits and on her neck. If
however she is a seasoned woman, he should do whatever is agreeable
either to him or to her, and whatever is fitting for the occasion. After
this he should take hold of her hair, and hold her chin in his fingers
for the purpose of kissing her. On this, if she is a young girl, she
will become bashful and close her eyes. Any how he should gather from
the action of the woman what things would be pleasing to her during
congress.

Here Suvarnanabha says that while a man is doing to the woman what he
likes best during congress, he should always make a point of pressing
those parts of her body on which she turns her eyes.

The signs of the enjoyment and satisfaction of the women are as follows:
her body relaxes, she closes her eyes, she puts aside all bashfulness,
and shows increased willingness to unite the two organs as closely
together as possible. On the other hand, the signs of her want of
enjoyment and of failing to be satisfied are as follows: she shakes her
hands, she does not let the man get up, feels dejected, bites the man,
kicks him, and continues to go on moving after the man has finished. In
such cases the man should rub the yoni of the woman with his hand and
fingers (as the elephant rubs anything with his trunk) before engaging
in congress, until it is softened, and after that is done he should
proceed to put his lingam into her.

The acts to be done by the man are:

   Moving forward.
   Friction or churning.
   Piercing.
   Rubbing.
   Pressing.
   Giving a blow.
   The blow of a boar.
   The blow of a bull.
   The sporting of a sparrow.

(1). When the organs are brought together properly and directly it is
called "moving the organ forward."

(2). When the lingam is held with the hand, and turned all round in the
yoni, it is called "churning."

(3). When the yoni is lowered, and the upper part of it is struck with
the lingam, it is called "piercing."

(4). When the same thing is done on the lower part of the yoni, it is
called "rubbing."

(5). When the yoni is pressed by the lingam for a long time, it is
called "pressing."

(6). When the lingam is removed to some distance from the yoni, and then
forcibly strikes it, it is called "giving a blow."

(7). When only one part of the yoni is rubbed with the lingam, it is
called the "blow of a boar."

(8). When both sides of the yoni are rubbed in this way, it is called
the "blow of a bull."

(9). When the lingam is in the yoni, and moved up and down frequently,
and without being taken out, it is called the "sporting of a sparrow."
This takes place at the end of congress.

When a woman acts the part of a man, she has the following things to do
in addition to the nine given above, viz.

   The pair of tongs.
   The top.
   The swing.

(1). When the woman holds the lingam in her yoni, draws it in, presses
it, and keeps it thus in her for a long time, it is called the "pair of
tongs."

(2). When, while engaged in congress, she turns round like a wheel, it
is called the "top." This is learnt by practice only.

(3). When, on such an occasion, the man lifts up the middle part of his
body, and the woman turns round her middle part, it is called the
"swing."

When the woman is tired, she should place her forehead on that of her
lover, and should thus take rest without disturbing the union of the
organs, and when the woman has rested herself the man should turn round
and begin the congress again.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows:

"Though a woman is reserved, and keeps her feelings concealed, yet when
she gets on the top of a man, she then shows all her love and desire. A
man should gather from the actions of the woman of what disposition she
is, and in what way she likes to be enjoyed. A woman during her monthly
courses, a woman who has been lately confined, and a fat woman should
not be made to act the part of a man."




CHAPTER XI.

OF THE AUPARISHTAKA[39] OR MOUTH CONGRESS.


There are two kinds of eunuchs, those that are disguised as males, and
those that are disguised as females. Eunuchs disguised as females
imitate their dress, speech, gestures, tenderness, timidity, simplicity,
softness and bashfulness. The acts that are done on the jaghana or
middle parts of women, are done in the mouths of these eunuchs, and this
is called Auparishtaka. These eunuchs derive their imaginable pleasure,
and their livelihood from this kind of congress, and they lead the life
of courtezans. So much concerning eunuchs disguised as females.

Eunuchs disguised as males keep their desires secret, and when they wish
to do anything they lead the life of shampooers. Under the pretence of
shampooing, an eunuch of this kind embraces and draws towards himself
the thighs of the man whom he is shampooing, and after this he touches
the joints of his thighs and his jaghana, or central portions of his
body. Then, if he finds the lingam of the man erect, he presses it with
his hands, and chaffs him for getting into that state. If after this,
and after knowing his intention, the man does not tell the eunuch to
proceed, then the latter does it of his own accord and begins the
congress. If however he is ordered by the man to do it, then he disputes
with him, and only consents at last with difficulty.

The following eight things are then done by the eunuch one after the
other, viz.

   The nominal congress.
   Biting the sides.
   Pressing outside.
   Pressing inside.
   Kissing.
   Rubbing.
   Sucking a mangoe fruit.
   Swallowing up.

At the end of each of these the eunuch expresses his wish to stop, but
when one of them is finished, the man desires him to do another, and
after that is done, then the one that follows it, and so on.

(1). When, holding the man's lingam with his hand, and placing it
between his lips, the eunuch moves about his mouth, it is called the
"nominal congress."

(2). When, covering the end of the lingam with his fingers collected
together like the bud of a plant or flower, the eunuch presses the sides
of it with his lips, using his teeth also, it is called "biting the
sides."

(3). When, being desired to proceed, the eunuch presses the end of the
lingam with his lips closed together, and kisses it as if he were
drawing it out, it is called the "outside pressing."

(4). When, being asked to go on, he put the lingam further into his
mouth, and presses it with his lips and then takes it out, it is called
the "inside pressing."

(5). When, holding the lingam in his hand, the eunuch kisses it as if he
were kissing the lower lip, it is called "kissing."

(6). When, after kissing it, he touches it with his tongue everywhere,
and passes the tongue over the end of it, it is called "rubbing."

(7). When, in the same way, he puts the half of it into his mouth, and
forcibly kisses and sucks it, this is called "sucking a mangoe fruit."

(8). And lastly, when, with the consent of the man, the eunuch puts the
whole lingam into his mouth, and presses it to the very end, as if he
were going to swallow it up, it is called "swallowing up."

Striking, scratching, and other things may also be done during this kind
of congress.

The Auparishtaka is practised only by unchaste and wanton women, female
attendants and serving maids, _i.e._, those who are not married to
anybody, but who live by shampooing.

The Acharyas (_i.e._, ancient and venerable authors) are of opinion that
this Auparishtaka is the work of a dog and not of a man, because it is a
low practice, and opposed to the orders of the Holy Writ, and because
the man himself suffers by bringing his lingam into contact with the
mouths of eunuchs and women. But Vatsyayana says that the orders of the
Holy Writ do not affect those who resort to courtezans, and the law
prohibits the practice of the Auparishtaka with married women only. As
regards the injury to the male, that can be easily remedied.

The people of Eastern India do not resort to women who practise the
Auparishtaka.

The people of Ahichhatra resort to such women, but do nothing with them,
so far as the mouth is concerned.

The people of Saketa do with these women every kind of mouth congress,
while the people of Nagara do not practise this, but do every other
thing.

The people of the Shurasena country, on the southern bank of the Jumna,
do everything without any hesitation, for they say that women being
naturally unclean, no one can be certain about their character, their
purity, their conduct, their practices, their confidences, or their
speech. They are not however on this account to be abandoned, because
religious law, on the authority of which they are reckoned pure, lays
down that the udder of a cow is clean at the time of milking, though the
mouth of a cow, and also the mouth of her calf, are considered unclean
by the Hindoos. Again a dog is clean when he seizes a deer in hunting,
though food touched by a dog is otherwise considered very unclean. A
bird is clean when it causes a fruit to fall from a tree by pecking at
it, though things eaten by crows and other birds are considered unclean.
And the mouth of a woman is clean for kissing and such like things at
the time of sexual intercourse. Vatsyayana moreover thinks that in all
these things connected with love, everybody should act according to the
custom of his country, and his own inclination.

There are also the following verses on the subject.

"The male servants of some men carry on the mouth congress with their
masters. It is also practised by some citizens, who know each other
well, among themselves. Some women of the harem, when they are amorous,
do the acts of the mouth on the yonis of one another, and some men do
the same thing with women. The way of doing this (_i.e._, of kissing the
yoni) should be known from kissing the mouth. When a man and woman lie
down in an inverted order, _i.e._, with the head of the one towards the
feet of the other and carry on this congress, it is called the "congress
of a crow."

For the sake of such things courtezans abandon men possessed of good
qualities, liberal and clever, and become attached to low persons, such
as slaves and elephant drivers. The Auparishtaka, or mouth congress,
should never be done by a learned Brahman, by a minister that carries on
the business of a state, or by a man of good reputation, because though
the practice is allowed by the Shastras, there is no reason why it
should be carried on, and need only be practised in particular cases. As
for instance, the taste, and the strength, and the digestive qualities
of the flesh of dogs are mentioned in works on medicine, but it does not
therefore follow that it should be eaten by the wise. In the same way
there are some men, some places and some times, with respect to which
these practices can be made use of. A man should therefore pay regard to
the place, to the time, and to the practice which is to be carried out,
as also as to whether it is agreeable to his nature and to himself, and
then he may or may not practise these things according to circumstances.
But after all, these things being done secretly, and the mind of the man
being fickle, how can it be known what any person will do at any
particular time and for any particular purpose.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 39: This practice appears to have been prevalent in some parts
of India from a very ancient time. The "Shushruta," a work on medicine
some two thousand years old, describes the wounding of the lingam with
the teeth as one of the causes of a disease treated upon in that work.
Traces of the practice are found as far back as the eighth century, for
various kinds of the Auparishtaka are represented in the sculptures of
many Shaiva temples at Bhuvaneshwara, near Cuttack, in Orissa, and which
were built about that period. From these sculptures being found in such
places, it would seem that this practice was popular in that part of the
country at that time. It does not seem to be so prevalent now in
Hindustan, its place perhaps is filled up by the practice of sodomy,
introduced since the Mahomedan period.]




CHAPTER X.

OF THE WAY HOW TO BEGIN AND HOW TO END THE CONGRESS.

DIFFERENT KINDS OF CONGRESS AND LOVE QUARRELS.


In the pleasure-room, decorated with flowers, and fragrant with
perfumes, attended by his friends and servants, the citizen should
receive the woman, who will come bathed and dressed, and will invite her
to take refreshment and to drink freely. He should then seat her on his
left side, and holding her hair, and touching also the end and knot of
her garment, he should gently embrace her with his right arm. They
should then carry on an amusing conversation on various subjects, and
may also talk suggestively of things which would be considered as
coarse, or not to be mentioned generally in society. They may then sing,
either with or without gesticulations, and play on musical instruments,
talk about the arts, and persuade each other to drink. At last when the
woman is overcome with love and desire, the citizen should dismiss the
people that may be with him, giving them flowers, ointment, and betel
leaves, and then when the two are left alone, they should proceed as has
been already described in the previous chapters.

Such is the beginning of sexual union. At the end of the congress, the
lovers with modesty, and not looking at each other, should go separately
to the washing-room. After this, sitting in their own places, they
should eat some betel leaves, and the citizen should apply with his own
hand to the body of the woman some pure sandal wood ointment, or
ointment of some other kind. He should then embrace her with his left
arm, and with agreeable words should cause her to drink from a cup held
in his own hand, or he may give her water to drink. They can then eat
sweetmeats, or anything else, according to their likings, and may drink
fresh juice,[40] soup, gruel, extracts of meat, sherbet, the juice of
mangoe fruits, the extract of the juice of the citron tree mixed with
sugar, or anything that may be liked in different countries, and known
to be sweet, soft, and pure. The lovers may also sit on the terrace of
the palace or house, and enjoy the moonlight, and carry on an agreeable
conversation. At this time, too, while the woman lies in his lap, with
her face towards the moon, the citizen should show her the different
planets, the morning star, the polar star, and the seven Rishis, or
Great Bear.

This is the end of sexual union.

Congress is of the following kinds, viz.:

   Loving congress.
   Congress of subsequent love.
   Congress of artificial love.
   Congress of transferred love.
   Congress like that of eunuchs.
   Deceitful congress.
   Congress of spontaneous love.

(1). When a man and a woman, who have been in love with each other for
some time, come together with great difficulty, or when one of the two
returns from a journey, or is reconciled after having been separated on
account of a quarrel, then congress is called the "loving congress." It
is carried on according to the liking of the lovers, and as long as they
choose.

(2). When two persons come together, while their love for each other is
still in its infancy, their congress is called the "congress of
subsequent love."

(3). When a man carries on the congress by exciting himself by means of
the sixty-four ways, such as kissing, etc., etc., or when a man and a
woman come together, though in reality they are both attached to
different persons, their congress is then called "congress of artificial
love." At this time all the ways and means mentioned in the Kama Shastra
should be used.

(4). When a man, from the beginning to the end of the congress, though
having connection with the women, thinks all the time that he is
enjoying another one whom he loves, it is called the "congress of
transferred love."

(5). Congress between a man and a female water carrier, or a female
servant of a caste lower than his own, lasting only until the desire is
satisfied, is called "congress like that of eunuchs." Here external
touches, kisses, and manipulations are not to be employed.

(6). The congress between a courtezan and a rustic, and that between
citizens and the women of villages, and bordering countries, is called,
"deceitful congress."

(7). The congress that takes place between two persons who are attached
to one another, and which is done according to their own liking is
called "spontaneous congress."

Thus ends the kinds of congress.

We shall now speak of love quarrels.

A woman who is very much in love with a man cannot bear to hear the name
of her rival mentioned, or to have any conversation regarding her, or to
be addressed by her name through mistake. If such takes place, a great
quarrel arises, and the woman cries, becomes angry, tosses her hair
about, strikes her lover, falls from her bed or seat, and, casting aside
her garlands and ornaments, throws herself down on the ground.

At this time, the lover should attempt to reconcile her with
conciliatory words, and should take her up carefully and place her on
her bed. But she, not replying to his questions, and with increased
anger, should bend down his head by pulling his hair, and having kicked
him once, twice, or thrice on his arms, head, bosom or back, should then
proceed to the door of the room. Dattaka says that she should then sit
angrily near the door and shed tears, but should not go out, because she
would be found fault with for going away. After a time, when she thinks
that the conciliatory words and actions of her lover have reached their
utmost, she should then embrace him, talking to him with harsh and
reproachful words, but at the same time showing a loving desire for
congress.

When the woman is in her own house, and has quarrelled with her lover,
she should go to him and show how angry she is, and leave him.
Afterwards the citizen having sent the Vita,[41] the Vidushaka[41] or
the Pithamurda[41] to pacify her, she should accompany them back to the
house, and spend the night with her lover.

Thus end the love quarrels.

In conclusion.

A man, employing the sixty-four means mentioned by Babhravya, obtains
his object, and enjoys the woman of the first quality. Though he may
speak well on other subjects, if he does not know the sixty-four
divisions, no great respect is paid to him in the assembly of the
learned. A man, devoid of other knowledge, but well acquainted with the
sixty-four divisions, becomes a leader in any society of men and women.
What man will not respect the sixty-four parts,[42] considering they are
respected by the learned, by the cunning, and by the courtezans. As the
sixty-four parts are respected, are charming, and add to the talent of
women, they are called by the Acharyas dear to women. A man skilled in
the sixty-four parts is looked upon with love by his own wife, by the
wives of others, and by courtezans.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 40: The fresh juice of the cocoa nut tree, the date tree, and
other kinds of palm trees are drunk in India. It will not keep fresh
very long, but ferments rapidly, and is then distilled into liquor.]

[Footnote 41: The characteristics of these three individuals have been
given in Part I. page 31.]

[Footnote 42: A definition of the sixty-four parts, or divisions, is
given in Chapter II., page 45.]

=END OF PART II.=




PART III.

ABOUT THE ACQUISITION OF A WIFE.




CHAPTER I.

ON MARRIAGE.


When a girl of the same caste, and a virgin, is married in accordance
with the precepts of Holy Writ, the results of such an union are: the
acquisition of Dharma and Artha, offspring, affinity, increase of
friends, and untarnished love. For this reason a man should fix his
affections upon a girl who is of good family, whose parents are alive,
and who is three years or more younger than himself. She should be born
of a highly respectable family, possessed of wealth, well connected, and
with many relations and friends. She should also be beautiful, of a good
disposition, with lucky marks on her body, and with good hair, nails,
teeth, ears, eyes, and breasts, neither more nor less than they ought to
be, and no one of them entirely wanting, and not troubled with a sickly
body. The man should, of course, also possess these qualities himself.
But at all events, says Ghotakamukha, a girl who has been already joined
with others (_i.e._, no longer a maiden) should never be loved, for it
would be reproachable to do such a thing.

Now in order to bring about a marriage with such a girl as described
above, the parents and relations of the man should exert themselves, as
also such friends on both sides as may be desired to assist in the
matter. These friends should bring to the notice of the girl's parents,
the faults, both present and future, of all the other men that may wish
to marry her, and should at the same time extol even to exaggeration
all the excellencies, ancestral, and paternal, of their friend, so as to
endear him to them, and particularly to those that may be liked by the
girl's mother. One of the friends should also disguise himself as an
astrologer and declare the future good fortune and wealth of his friend
by showing the existence of all the lucky omens[43] and signs,[44] the
good influence of planets, the auspicious entrance of the sun into a
sign of the Zodiac, propitious stars and fortunate marks on his body.
Others again should rouse the jealousy of the girl's mother by telling
her that their friend has a chance of getting from some other quarter
even a better girl than hers.

A girl should be taken as a wife, as also given in marriage, when
fortune, signs, omens, and the words[45] of others are favourable, for,
says Ghotakamukha, a man should not marry at any time he likes. A girl
who is asleep, crying, or gone out of the house when sought in marriage,
or who is betrothed to another, should not be married. The following
also should be avoided:

   One who is kept concealed.
   One who has an ill-sounding name.
   One who has her nose depressed.
   One who has her nostril turned up.
   One who is formed like a male.
   One who is bent down.
   One who has crooked thighs.
   One who has a projecting forehead.
   One who has a bald head.
   One who does not like purity.
   One who has been polluted by another.
   One who is afflicted with the Gulma.[46]
   One who is disfigured in any way.
   One who has fully arrived at puberty.
   One who is a friend.
   One who is a younger sister.
   One who is a Varshakari.[47]

In the same way a girl who is called by the name of one of the
twenty-seven stars, or by the name of a tree, or of a river, is
considered worthless, as also a girl whose name ends in "r" or "l." But
some authors say that prosperity is gained only by marrying that girl to
whom one becomes attached, and that therefore no other girl but the one
who is loved should be married by anyone.

When a girl becomes marriageable her parents should dress her smartly,
and should place her where she can be easily seen by all. Every
afternoon, having dressed her and decorated her in a becoming manner,
they should send her with her female companions to sports, sacrifices,
and marriage ceremonies, and thus show her to advantage in society,
because she is a kind of merchandise. They should also receive with kind
words and signs of friendliness those of an auspicious appearance who
may come accompanied by their friends and relations for the purpose of
marrying their daughter, and under some pretext or other having first
dressed her becomingly, should then present her to them. After this they
should await the pleasure of fortune, and with this object should
appoint a future day on which a determination could be come to with
regard to their daughter's marriage. On this occasion when the persons
have come, the parents of the girl should ask them to bathe and dine,
and should say, "Everything will take place at the proper time," and
should not then comply with the request, but should settle the matter
later.

When a girl is thus acquired, either according to the custom of the
country, or according to his own desire, the man should marry her in
accordance with the precepts of the Holy Writ, according to one of the
four kinds of marriage.

Thus ends marriage.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows:--

Amusement in society, such as completing verses begun by others,
marriages, and auspicious ceremonies should be carried on neither with
superiors, nor inferiors, but with our equals. That should be known as a
high connection when a man, after marrying a girl, has to serve her and
her relations afterwards like a servant, and such a connection is
censured by the good. On the other hand, that reproachable connection,
where a man, together with his relations, lords it over his wife, is
called a low connection by the wise. But when both the man and the woman
afford mutual pleasure to each other, and when the relatives on both
sides pay respect to one another, such is called a connection in the
proper sense of the word. Therefore a man should contract neither a high
connection by which he is obliged to bow down afterwards to his kinsmen,
nor a low connection, which is universally reprehended by all.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 43: The flight of a blue jay on a person's left side is
considered a lucky omen when one starts on any business; the appearance
of a cat before anyone at such a time is looked on as a bad omen. There
are many omens of the same kind.]

[Footnote 44: Such as the throbbing of the right eye of men and the left
eye of women, etc.]

[Footnote 45: Before anything is begun it is a custom to go early in the
morning to a neighbour's house, and overhear the first words that may be
spoken in his family, and according as the words heard are of good or
bad import, so draw an inference as to the success or failure of the
undertaking.]

[Footnote 46: A disease consisting of any glandular enlargement in any
part of the body.]

[Footnote 47: A woman, the palms of whose hands and the soles of whose
feet are always perspiring.]




CHAPTER II.

OF CREATING CONFIDENCE IN THE GIRL.


For the first three days after marriage, the girl and her husband should
sleep on the floor, abstain from sexual pleasures, and eat their food
without seasoning it either with alkali or salt. For the next seven days
they should bathe amidst the sounds of auspicious musical instruments,
should decorate themselves, dine together, and pay attention to their
relations as well as to those who may have come to witness their
marriage. This is applicable to persons of all castes. On the night of
the tenth day the man should begin in a lonely place with soft words,
and thus create confidence in the girl. Some authors say that for the
purpose of winning her over he should not speak to her for three days,
but the followers of Babhravya are of opinion that if the man does not
speak with her for three days, the girl may be discouraged by seeing him
spiritless like a pillar, and, becoming dejected, she may begin to
despise him as an eunuch. Vatsyayana says that the man should begin to
win her over, and to create confidence in her, but should abstain at
first from sexual pleasures. Women being of a tender nature, want tender
beginnings, and when they are forcibly approached by men with whom they
are but slightly acquainted, they sometimes suddenly become haters of
sexual connection, and sometimes even haters of the male sex. The man
should therefore approach the girl according to her liking, and should
make use of those devices by which he may be able to establish himself
more and more into her confidence. These devices are as follows:--

He should embrace her first of all in a way she likes most, because it
does not last for a long time.

He should embrace her with the upper part of his body because that is
easier and simpler. If the girl is grown up, or if the man has known
her for some time, he may embrace her by the light of a lamp, but if he
is not well acquainted with her, or if she is a young girl, he should
then embrace her in darkness.

When the girl accepts the embrace, the man should put a "tambula" or
screw of betel nut and betel leaves in her mouth, and if she will not
take it, he should induce her to do so by conciliatory words,
entreaties, oaths, and kneeling at her feet, for it is an universal rule
that however bashful or angry a woman may be, she never disregards a man
kneeling at her feet. At the time of giving this "tambula" he should
kiss her mouth softly and gracefully without making any sound. When she
is gained over in this respect he should then make her talk, and so that
she may be induced to talk he should ask her questions about things of
which he knows or pretends to know nothing, and which can be answered in
a few words. If she does not speak to him, he should not frighten her,
but should ask her the same thing again and again in a conciliatory
manner. If she does not then speak he should urge her to give a reply,
because as Ghotakamukha says, "all girls hear everything said to them by
men, but do not themselves sometimes say a single word." When she is
thus importuned, the girl should give replies by shakes of the head, but
if she quarrelled with the man she should not even do that. When she is
asked by the man whether she wishes for him, and whether she likes him,
she should remain silent for a long time, and when at last importuned to
reply, should give him a favourable answer by a nod of the head. If the
man is previously acquainted with the girl he should converse with her
by means of a female friend, who may be favourable to him, and in the
confidence of both, and carry on the conversation on both sides. On such
an occasion the girl should smile with her head bent down, and if the
female friend say more on her part than she was desired to do, she
should chide her and dispute with her. The female friend should say in
jest even what she is not desired to say by the girl, and add, "she says
so," on which the girl should say indistinctly and prettily, "O no! I
did not say so," and she should then smile and throw an occasional
glance towards the man.

If the girl is familiar with the man, she should place near him,
without saying anything, the tambula, the ointment, or the garland that
he may have asked for, or she may tie them up in his upper garment.
While she is engaged in this, the man should touch her young breasts in
the sounding way of pressing with the nails, and if she prevents him
doing this he should say to her, "I will not do it again if you will
embrace me," and should in this way cause her to embrace him. While he
is being embraced by her he should pass his hand repeatedly over and
about her body. By and bye he should place her in his lap, and try more
and more to gain her consent, and if she will not yield to him he should
frighten her by saying, "I shall impress marks of my teeth and nails on
your lips and breasts, and then make similar marks on my own body, and
shall tell my friends that you did them. What will you say then?" In
this and other ways, as fear and confidence are created in the minds of
children, so should the man gain her over to his wishes.

On the second and third nights, after her confidence has increased still
more, he should feel the whole of her body with his hands, and kiss her
all over; he should also place his hands upon her thighs and shampoo
them, and if he succeed in this he should then shampoo the joints of her
thighs. If she tries to prevent him doing this he should say to her,
"What harm is there in doing it?" and should persuade her to let him do
it. After gaining this point he should touch her private parts, should
loosen her girdle and the knot of her dress, and turning up her lower
garment should shampoo the joints of her naked thighs. Under various
pretences he should do all these things, but he should not at that time
begin actual congress. After this he should teach her the sixty-four
arts, should tell her how much he loves her, and describe to her the
hopes which he formerly entertained regarding her. He should also
promise to be faithful to her in future, and should dispel all her fears
with respect to rival women, and, at last, after having overcome her
bashfulness, he should begin to enjoy her in a way so as not to frighten
her. So much about creating confidence in the girl; and there are,
moreover, some verses on the subject as follows:--

A man acting according to the inclinations of a girl should try and gain
her over so that she may love him and place her confidence in him. A
man does not succeed either by implicitly following the inclination of a
girl, or by wholly opposing her, and he should therefore adopt a middle
course. He who knows how to make himself beloved by women, as well as to
increase their honour and create confidence in them, this man becomes an
object of their love. But he, who neglects a girl thinking she is too
bashful, is despised by her as a beast ignorant of the working of the
female mind. Moreover, a girl forcibly enjoyed by one who does not
understand the hearts of girls becomes nervous, uneasy, and dejected,
and suddenly begins to hate the man who has taken advantage of her; and
then, when her love is not understood or returned, she sinks into
despondency, and becomes either a hater of mankind altogether, or,
hating her own man, she has recourse to other men.[48]

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 48: These last few lines have been exemplified in many ways in
many novels of this century.]




CHAPTER III.

ON COURTSHIP, AND THE MANIFESTATION OF THE FEELINGS BY OUTWARD SIGNS AND
DEEDS.


A poor man possessed of good qualities, a man born of a low family
possessed of mediocre qualities, a neighbour possessed of wealth, and
one under the control of his father, mother or brothers, should not
marry without endeavouring to gain over the girl from her childhood to
love and esteem them. Thus a boy separated from his parents, and living
in the house of his uncle, should try to gain over the daughter of his
uncle, or some other girl, even though she be previously betrothed to
another. And this way of gaining over a girl, says Ghotakamukha, is
unexceptional, because Dharma can be accomplished by means of it, as
well as by any other way of marriage.

When a boy has thus begun to woo the girl he loves, he should spend his
time with her and amuse her with various games and diversions fitted for
their age and acquaintanceship, such as picking and collecting flowers,
making garlands of flowers, playing the parts of members of a fictitious
family, cooking food, playing with dice, playing with cards, the game of
odd and even, the game of finding out the middle finger, the game of six
pebbles, and such other games as may be prevalent in the country, and
agreeable to the disposition of the girl. In addition to this, he should
carry on various amusing games played by several persons together, such
as hide and seek, playing with seeds, hiding things in several small
heaps of wheat and looking for them, blind-man's buff, gymnastic
exercises, and other games of the same sort, in company with the girl,
her friends and female attendants. The man should also show great
kindness to any woman whom the girl thinks fit to be trusted, and should
also make new acquaintances, but above all he should attach to himself
by kindness and little services the daughter of the girl's nurse, for
if she be gained over, even though she comes to know of his design, she
does not cause any obstruction, but is sometimes even able to effect an
union between him and the girl. And though she knows the true character
of the man, she always talks of his many excellent qualities to the
parents and relations of the girl, even though she may not be desired to
do so by him.

In this way the man should do whatever the girl takes most delight in,
and he should get for her whatever she may have a desire to possess.
Thus he should procure for her such playthings as may be hardly known to
other girls. He may also show her a ball dyed with various colours, and
other curiosities of the same sort; and should give her dolls made of
cloth, wood, buffalo-horn, ivory, wax, flour, or earth; also utensils
for cooking food, and figures in wood, such as a man and woman standing,
a pair of rams, or goats, or sheep; also temples made of earth, bamboo,
or wood, dedicated to various goddesses; and cages for parrots, cuckoos,
starlings, quails, cocks, and partridges; water-vessels of different
sorts and of elegant forms, machines for throwing water about, guitars,
stands for putting images upon, stools, lac, red arsenic, yellow
ointment, vermilion and collyrium, as well as sandal-wood, saffron,
betel nut and betel leaves. Such things should be given at different
times whenever he gets a good opportunity of meeting her, and some of
them should be given in private, and some in public, according to
circumstances. In short, he should try in every way to make her look
upon him as one who would do for her everything that she wanted to be
done.

In the next place he should get her to meet him in some place privately,
and should then tell her that the reason of his giving presents to her
in secret was the fear that the parents of both of them might be
displeased, and then he may add that the things which he had given her
had been much desired by other people. When her love begins to show
signs of increasing he should relate to her agreeable stories if she
expresses a wish to hear such narratives. Or if she takes delight in
legerdemain, he should amaze her by performing various tricks of
jugglery; or if she feels a great curiosity to see a performance of the
various arts, he should show his own skill in them. When she is
delighted with singing he should entertain her with music, and on
certain days, and at the time of going together to moonlight fairs and
festivals, and at the time of her return after being absent from home,
he should present her with bouquets of flowers, and with chaplets for
the head, and with ear ornaments and rings, for these are the proper
occasions on which such things should be presented.

He should also teach the daughter of the girl's nurse all the sixty-four
means of pleasure practised by men, and under this pretext should also
inform her of his great skill in the art of sexual enjoyment. All this
time he should wear a fine dress, and make as good an appearance as
possible, for young women love men who live with them, and who are
handsome, good looking and well dressed. As for the saying that though
women may fall in love, they still make no effort themselves to gain
over the object of their affections, that is only a matter of idle talk.

Now a girl always shows her love by outward signs and actions, such as
the following:--She never looks the man in the face, and becomes abashed
when she is looked at by him; under some pretext or other she shows her
limbs to him; she looks secretly at him though he has gone away from her
side; hangs down her head when she is asked some question by him, and
answers in indistinct words and unfinished sentences, delights to be in
his company for a long time, speaks to her attendants in a peculiar tone
with the hope of attracting his attention towards her when she is at a
distance from him, does not wish to go from the place where he is, under
some pretext or other she makes him look at different things, narrates
to him tales and stories very slowly so that she may continue conversing
with him for a long time, kisses and embraces before him a child sitting
in her lap, draws ornamental marks on the foreheads of her female
servants, performs sportive and graceful movements when her attendants
speak jestingly to her in the presence of her lover, confides in her
lover's friends, and respects and obeys them, shows kindness to his
servants, converses with them, and engages them to do her work as if she
were their mistress, and listens attentively to them when they tell
stories about her lover to somebody else, enters his house when induced
to do so by the daughter of her nurse, and by her assistance manages to
converse and play with him, avoids being seen by her lover when she is
not dressed and decorated, gives him by the hand of her female friend
her ear ornament, ring, or garland of flowers that he may have asked to
see, always wears anything that he may have presented to her, become
dejected when any other bridegroom is mentioned by her parents, and does
not mix with those who may be of her party, or who may support his
claims.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows:--

A man, who has seen and perceived the feelings of the girl towards him,
and who has noticed the outward signs and movements by which those
feelings are expressed, should do everything in his power to effect an
union with her. He should gain over a young girl by childlike sports, a
damsel come of age by his skill in the arts, and a girl that loves him
by having recourse to persons in whom she confides.




CHAPTER IV.

ABOUT THINGS TO BE DONE ONLY BY THE MAN, AND THE ACQUISITION OF THE GIRL
THEREBY. ALSO WHAT IS TO BE DONE BY A GIRL TO GAIN OVER A MAN, AND
SUBJECT HIM TO HER.


Now when the girl begins to show her love by outward signs and motions,
as described in the last chapter, the lover should try to gain her over
entirely by various ways and means, such as the following:--

When engaged with her in any game or sport he should intentionally hold
her hand. He should practise upon her the various kinds of embraces,
such as the touching embrace, and others already described in a
preceeding chapter (Part II. Chapter 2). He should show her a pair of
human beings cut out of the leaf of a tree, and such like things, at
intervals. When engaged in water sports, he should dive at a distance
from her, and come up close to her. He should show an increased liking
for the new foliage of trees and such like things. He should describe to
her the pangs he suffers on her account. He should relate to her the
beautiful dream that he has had with reference to other women. At
parties and assemblies of his caste he should sit near her, and touch
her under some pretence or other, and having placed his foot upon her's,
he should slowly touch each of her toes, and press the ends of the
nails; if successful in this, he should get hold of her foot with his
hand and repeat the same thing. He should also press a finger of her
hand between his toes when she happens to be washing his feet; and
whenever he gives anything to her or takes anything from her, he should
show her by his manner and look how much he loves her.

He should sprinkle upon her the water brought for rinsing his mouth; and
when alone with her in a lonely place, or in darkness, he should make
love to her, and tell her the true state of his mind without distressing
her in any way.

Whenever he sits with her on the same seat or bed he should say to her,
"I have something to tell you in private," and then, when she comes to
hear it in a quiet place, he should express his love to her more by
manner and signs than by words. When he comes to know the state of her
feelings towards him he should pretend to be ill, and should make her
come to his house to speak to him. There he should intentionally hold
her hand and place it on his eyes and forehead, and under the pretence
of preparing some medicine for him he should ask her to do work for his
sake in the following words: "This work must be done by you, and by
nobody else." When she wants to go away he should let her go, with an
earnest request to come and see him again. This device of illness should
be continued for three days and three nights. After this, when she
begins coming to see him frequently, he should carry on long
conversations with her, for, says Ghotakamukha, "though a man loves a
girl ever so much, he never succeeds in winning her without a great deal
of talking." At last, when the man finds the girl completely gained
over, he may then begin to enjoy her. As for the saying that women grow
less timid than usual during the evening, and in darkness, and are
desirous of congress at those times, and do not oppose men then and
should only be enjoyed at these hours, it is a matter of talk only.

When it is impossible for the man to carry on his endeavours alone, he
should, by means of the daughter of her nurse, or of a female friend in
whom she confides, cause the girl to be brought to him without making
known to her his design, and he should then proceed with her in the
manner above described. Or he should in the beginning send his own
female servant to live with the girl as her friend, and should then gain
her over by her means.

At last, when he knows the state of her feelings by her outward manner
and conduct towards him at religious ceremonies, marriage ceremonies,
fairs, festivals, theatres, public assemblies, and such like occasions,
he should begin to enjoy her when she is alone, for Vatsyayana lays it
down, that women, when resorted to at proper times and in proper
places, do not turn away from their lovers.

When a girl, possessed of good qualities and well-bred, though born in a
humble family, or destitute of wealth, and not therefore desired by her
equals, or an orphan girl, or one deprived of her parents, but observing
the rules of her family and caste, should wish to bring about her own
marriage when she comes of age, such a girl should endeavour to gain
over a strong and good looking young man, or a person whom she thinks
would marry her on account of the weakness of his mind, and even without
the consent of his parents. She should do this by such means as would
endear her to the said person, as well as by frequently seeing and
meeting him. Her mother also should constantly cause them to meet by
means of her female friends, and the daughter of her nurse. The girl
herself should try to get alone with her beloved in some quiet place,
and at odd times should give him flowers, betel nut, betel leaves and
perfumes. She should also show her skill in the practice of the arts, in
shampooing, in scratching and in pressing with the nails. She should
also talk to him on the subjects he likes best, and discuss with him the
ways and means of gaining over and winning the affections of a girl.

But old authors say that although the girl loves the man ever so much,
she should not offer herself, or make the first overtures, for a girl
who does this loses her dignity, and is liable to be scorned and
rejected. But when the man shows his wish to enjoy her, she should be
favourable to him and should show no change in her demeanour when he
embraces her, and should receive all the manifestations of his love as
if she were ignorant of the state of his mind. But when he tries to kiss
her she should oppose him; when he begs to be allowed to have sexual
intercourse with her she should let him touch her private parts only and
with considerable difficulty; and though importuned by him, she should
not yield herself up to him as if of her own accord, but should resists
his attempts to have her. It is only, moreover, when she is certain that
she is truly loved, and that her lover is indeed devoted to her, and
will not change his mind, that she should then give herself up to him,
and persuade him to marry her quickly. After losing her virginity she
should tell her confidential friends about it.

Here ends the efforts of a girl to gain over a man.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows: A girl who is much
sought after should marry the man that she likes, and whom she thinks
would be obedient to her, and capable of giving her pleasure. But when
from the desire of wealth a girl is married by her parents to a rich man
without taking into consideration the character or looks of the
bridegroom, or when given to a man who has several wives, she never
becomes attached to the man, even though he be endowed with good
qualities, obedient to her will, active, strong, and healthy, and
anxious to please her in every way.[49] A husband who is obedient but
yet master of himself, though he be poor and not good looking, is better
than one who is common to many women, even though he be handsome and
attractive. The wives of rich men, where there are many wives, are not
generally attached to their husbands, and are not confidential with
them, and even though they possess all the external enjoyments of life,
still have recourse to other men. A man who is of a low mind, who has
fallen from his social position, and who is much given to travelling,
does not deserve to be married; neither does one who has many wives and
children, or one who is devoted to sport and gambling, and who comes to
his wife only when he likes. Of all the lovers of a girl he only is her
true husband who possesses the qualities that are liked by her, and such
a husband only enjoys real superiority over her, because he is the
husband of love.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 49: There is a good deal of truth in the last few
observations. Woman is a monogamous animal, and loves but one, and likes
to feel herself alone in the affections of one man, and cannot bear
rivals. It may also be taken as a general rule that women either married
to, or kept by, rich men love them for their wealth, but not for
themselves.]




CHAPTER V.

ON CERTAIN FORMS OF MARRIAGE[50]


When a girl cannot meet her lover frequently in private, she should send
the daughter of her nurse to him, it being understood that she has
confidence in her, and had previously gained her over to her interests.
On seeing the man, the daughter of the nurse should, in the course of
conversation, describe to him the noble birth, the good disposition, the
beauty, talent, skill, knowledge of human nature and affection of the
girl in such a way as not to let him suppose that she has been sent by
the girl, and should thus create affection for the girl in the heart of
the man. To the girl also she should speak about the excellent qualities
of the man, especially of those qualities which she knows are pleasing
to the girl. She should, moreover, speak with disparagement of the other
lovers of the girl, and talk about the avarice and indiscretion of their
parents, and the fickleness of their relations. She should also quote
samples of many girls of ancient times, such as Sakuntala and others,
who, having united themselves with lovers of their own caste and their
own choice, were ever happy afterwards in their society. And she should
also tell of other girls who married into great families, and being
troubled by rival wives, became wretched and miserable, and were finally
abandoned. She should further speak of the good fortune, the continual
happiness, the chastity, obedience, and affection of the man, and if the
girl gets amorous about him, she should endeavour to allay her shame[51]
and her fear as well as her suspicions about any disaster that might
result from the marriage. In a word, she should act the whole part of a
female messenger by telling the girl all about the man's affection for
her, the places he frequented, and the endeavours he made to meet her,
and by frequently repeating, "It will be all right if the man will take
you away forcibly and unexpectedly."


_The Forms of Marriage._

When the girl is gained over, and acts openly with the man as his wife,
he should cause fire to be brought from the house of a Brahman, and
having spread the Kusha grass upon the ground, and offered an oblation
to the fire he should marry her according to the precepts of the
religious law. After this he should inform his parents of the fact,
because it is the opinion of ancient authors that a marriage solemnly
contracted in the presence of fire cannot afterwards be set aside.

After the consummation of the marriage, the relations of the man should
gradually be made acquainted with the affair, and the relations of the
girl should also be apprised of it in such a way that they may consent
to the marriage, and overlook the manner in which it was brought about,
and when this is done they should afterwards be reconciled by
affectionate presents and favourable conduct. In this manner the man
should marry the girl according to the Gandharva form of marriage.

When the girl cannot make up her mind, or will not express her readiness
to marry, the man should obtain her in any one of the following ways:--

(1). On a fitting occasion, and under some excuse, he should by means of
a female friend with whom he is well acquainted, and whom he can trust,
and who also is well known to the girl's family, get the girl brought
unexpectedly to his house, and he should then bring fire from the house
of a Brahman, and proceed as before described.

(2.) When the marriage of the girl with some other person draws near,
the man should disparage the future husband to the utmost in the mind of
the mother of the girl, and then having got the girl to come with her
mother's consent to a neighbouring house, he should bring fire from the
house of a Brahman, and proceed as above.

(3.) The man should become a great friend of the brother of the girl,
the said brother being of the same age as himself, and addicted to
courtesans, and to intrigues with the wives of other people, and should
give him assistance in such matters, and also give him occasional
presents. He should then tell him about his great love for his sister,
as young men will sacrifice even their lives for the sake of those who
may be of the same age, habits, and dispositions as themselves. After
this the man should get the girl brought by means of her brother to some
secure place, and having brought fire from the house of a Brahman,
should proceed as before.

(4.) The man should on the occasion of festivals get the daughter of the
nurse to give the girl some intoxicating substance, and then cause her
to be brought to some secure place under the pretence of some business,
and there having enjoyed her before she recovers from her intoxication,
should bring fire from the house of a Brahman, and proceed as before.

(5.) The man should, with the connivance of the daughter of the nurse,
carry off the girl from her house while she is asleep, and then, having
enjoyed her before she recovers from her sleep, should bring fire from
the house of a Brahman, and proceed as before.

(6.) When the girl goes to a garden, or to some village in the
neighbourhood, the man should, with his friends, fall on her guards, and
having killed them, or frightened them away, forcibly carry her off, and
proceed as before.

There are verses on the subject as follows:--In all the forms of
marriage given in this chapter of this work, the one that precedes is
better than the one that follows it, on account of its being more in
accordance with the commands of religion, and therefore it is only when
it is impossible to carry the former into practice that the latter
should be resorted to. As the fruit of all good marriages is love, the
Gandharva[52] form of marriage is respected, even though it is formed
under unfavourable circumstances, because it fulfils the object sought
for. Another cause of the respect accorded to the Gandharva form of
marriage is, that it brings forth happiness, causes less trouble in its
performance than any other forms of marriage, and is above all the
result of previous love.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 50: These forms of marriage differ from the four kinds of
marriage mentioned in Chapter I., and are only to be made use of when
the girl is gained over in the way mentioned in Chapters III. and IV.]

[Footnote 51: About this, see a story on the fatal effects of love at
page 114 of "Early Ideas; a Group of Hindoo Stories," collected and
collated by Anaryan. W. H. Allen and Co., London, 1881.]

[Footnote 52: About the Gandharvavivaha form of marriage, see note to
page 28 of Captain R. F. Burton's "Vickram and the Vampire; or Tales of
Hindu Devilry." Longman, Green & Co., London, 1870. This form of
matrimony was recognised by the ancient Hindus, and is frequent in
books. It is a kind of Scotch Wedding--ultra-Caledonian--taking place by
mutual consent without any form or ceremony. The Gandharvas are heavenly
minstrels of Indra's court, who are supposed to be witnesses.]

=END OF PART III.=




PART IV.

ABOUT A WIFE.




CHAPTER I.

ON THE MANNER OF LIVING OF A VIRTUOUS WOMAN, AND OF HER BEHAVIOUR DURING
THE ABSENCE OF HER HUSBAND.


A virtuous woman, who has affection for her husband, should act in
conformity with his wishes as if he were a divine being, and with his
consent should take upon herself the whole care of his family. She
should keep the whole house well cleaned, and arrange flowers of various
kinds in different parts of it, and make the floor smooth and polished
so as to give the whole a neat and becoming appearance. She should
surround the house with a garden, and place ready in it all the
materials required for the morning, noon and even sacrifices. Moreover
she should herself revere the sanctuary of the Household Gods, for says
Gonardiya, "nothing so much attracts the heart of a householder to his
wife as a careful observance of the things mentioned above."

Towards the parents, relations, friends, sisters, and servants of her
husband she should behave as they deserve. In the garden she should
plant beds of green vegetables, bunches of the sugar cane, and clumps of
the fig tree, the mustard plant, the parsley plant, the fennel plant,
and the xanthochymus pictorius. Clusters of various flowers, such as the
trapa bispinosa, the jasmine, the gasminum grandiflorum, the yellow
amaranth, the wild jasmine, the tabernamontana coronaria, the
nadyaworta, the china rose and others, should likewise be planted,
together with the fragrant grass andropogon sch√¶nanthus, and the
fragrant root of the plant andropogon miricatus. She should also have
seats and arbours made in the garden, in the middle of which a well,
tank, or pool should be dug.

The wife should always avoid the company of female beggars, female
buddish mendicants, unchaste and roguish women, female fortune tellers
and witches. As regards meals she should always consider what her
husband likes and dislikes, and what things are good for him, and what
are injurious to him. When she hears the sounds of his footsteps coming
home she should at once get up, and be ready to do whatever he may
command her, and either order her female servant to wash his feet, or
wash them herself. When going anywhere with her husband, she should put
on her ornaments, and without his consent she should not either give or
accept invitations, or attend marriages and sacrifices, or sit in the
company of female friends, or visit the temples of the Gods. And if she
wants to engage in any kind of games or sports, she should not do it
against his will. In the same way she should always sit down after him,
and get up before him, and should never awaken him when he is asleep.
The kitchen should be situated in a quiet and retired place, so as not
to be accessible to strangers, and should always look clean.

In the event of any misconduct on the part of her husband, she should
not blame him excessively though she be a little displeased. She should
not use abusive language towards him, but rebuke him with conciliatory
words, whether he be in the company of friends or alone. Moreover, she
should not be a scold, for says Gonardiya, "there is no cause of dislike
on the part of a husband so great as this characteristic in a wife."
Lastly she should avoid bad expressions, sulky looks, speaking aside,
standing in the doorway, and looking at passers-by, conversing in the
pleasure groves, and remaining in a lonely place for a long time; and
finally she should always keep her body, her teeth, her hair, and
everything belonging to her tidy, sweet, and clean.

When the wife wants to approach her husband in private her dress should
consist of many ornaments, various kinds of flowers, and a cloth
decorated with different colours, and some sweet-smelling ointments or
unguents. But her every-day dress should be composed of a thin,
close-textured cloth, a few ornaments and flowers, and a little scent,
not too much. She should also observe the fasts and vows of her husband,
and when he tries to prevent her doing this, she should persuade him to
let her do it.

At appropriate times of the year, and when they happen to be cheap, she
should buy earth, bamboos, firewood, skins, and iron pots, as also salt
and oil. Fragrant substances, vessels made of the fruit of the plant
wrightea antidysenterica, or oval leaved wrightea, medicines, and other
things which are always wanted, should be obtained when required and
kept in a secret place of the house. The seeds of the radish, the
potato, the common beet, the Indian wormwood, the mangoe, the cucumber,
the egg plant, the kushmanda, the pumpkin gourd, the surana, the
bignonia indica, the sandal wood, the premna spinosa, the garlic plant,
the onion, and other vegetables, should be bought and sown at the proper
seasons.

The wife, moreover, should not tell to strangers the amount of her
wealth, nor the secrets which her husband has confided to her. She
should surpass all the women of her own rank in life in her cleverness,
her appearance, her knowledge of cookery, her pride, and her manner of
serving her husband. The expenditure of the year should be regulated by
the profits. The milk that remains after the meals should be turned into
ghee or clarified butter. Oil and sugar should be prepared at home;
spinning and weaving should also be done there; and a store of ropes and
cords, and barks of trees for twisting into ropes should be kept. She
should also attend to the pounding and cleaning of rice, using its small
grain and chaff in some way or other. She should pay the salaries of the
servants, look after the tilling of the fields, and keeping of the
flocks and herds, superintend the making of vehicles, and take care of
the rams, cocks, quails, parrots, starlings, cuckoos, peacocks, monkeys,
and deer; and finally adjust the income and expenditure of the day. The
worn-out clothes should be given to those servants who have done good
work, in order to show them that their services have been appreciated,
or they may be applied to some other use. The vessels in which wine is
prepared, as well as those in which it is kept, should be carefully
looked after, and put away at the proper time. All sales and purchases
should also be well attended to. The friends of her husband she should
welcome by presenting them with flowers, ointment, incense, betel
leaves, and betel nut. Her father-in-law and mother-in law she should
treat as they deserve, always remaining dependant on their will, never
contradicting them, speaking to them in few and not harsh words, not
laughing loudly in their presence, and acting with their friends and
enemies as with her own. In addition to the above she should not be
vain, or too much taken up with her enjoyments. She should be liberal
towards her servants, and reward them on holidays and festivals; and not
give away anything without first making it known to her husband.

Thus ends the manner of living of a virtuous woman.

During the absence of her husband on a journey the virtuous woman should
wear only her auspicious ornaments, and observe the fasts in honour of
the Gods. While anxious to hear the news of her husband, she should
still look after her household affairs. She should sleep near the elder
women of the house, and make herself agreeable to them. She should look
after and keep in repair the things that are liked by her husband, and
continue the works that have been begun by him. To the abode of her
relations she should not go except on occasions of joy and sorrow, and
then she should go in her usual travelling dress, accompanied by her
husband's servants, and not remain there for a long time. The fasts and
feasts should be observed with the consent of the elders of the house.
The resources should be increased by making purchases and sales
according to the practice of the merchants, and by means of honest
servants, superintended by herself. The income should be increased, and
the expenditure diminished as much as possible. And when her husband
returns from his journey, she should receive him at first in her
ordinary clothes, so that he may know in what way she has lived during
his absence, and should bring to him some presents, as also materials
for the worship of the Deity.

Thus ends the part relating to the behaviour of a wife during the
absence of her husband on a journey.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows.

"The wife, whether she be a woman of noble family, or a virgin widow[53]
re-married, or a concubine, should lead a chaste life, devoted to her
husband, and doing every thing for his welfare. Women acting thus,
acquire Dharma, Artha, and Kama, obtain a high position, and generally
keep their husbands devoted to them."

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 53: This probably refers to a girl married in her infancy, or
when very young, and whose husband had died before she arrived at the
age of puberty. Infant marriages are still the common custom of the
Hindoos.]




CHAPTER II.

ON THE CONDUCT OF THE ELDER WIFE TOWARDS THE OTHER WIVES OF HER HUSBAND,
AND ON THAT OF A YOUNGER WIFE TOWARDS THE ELDER ONES. ALSO ON THE
CONDUCT OF A VIRGIN WIDOW RE-MARRIED; OF A WIFE DISLIKED BY HER HUSBAND;
OF THE WOMEN IN THE KING'S HAREM; AND LASTLY ON THE CONDUCT OF A HUSBAND
TOWARDS MANY WIVES.


The causes of re-marrying during the lifetime of the wife are as
follows:

(1). The folly or ill temper of the wife.

(2). Her husband's dislike to her.

(3). The want of offspring.

(4). The continual birth of daughters.

(5). The incontinence of the husband.

From the very beginning the wife should endeavour to attract the heart
of her husband, by showing to him continually her devotion, her good
temper, and her wisdom. If however she bears him no children, she should
herself tell her husband to marry another woman. And when the second
wife is married, and brought to the house, the first wife should give
her a position superior to her own, and look upon her as a sister. In
the morning the elder wife should forcibly make the younger one decorate
herself in the presence of their husband, and should not mind all the
husband's favour being given to her. If the younger wife does anything
to displease her husband the elder one should not neglect her, but
should always be ready to give her most careful advice, and should teach
her to do various things in the presence of her husband. Her children
she should treat as her own, her attendants she should look upon with
more regard, even than on her own servants, her friends she should
cherish with love and kindness, and her relations with great honour.

When there are many other wives besides herself, the elder wife should
associate with the one who is immediately next to her in rank and age,
and should instigate the wife who has recently enjoyed her husband's
favour to quarrel with the present favourite. After this she should
sympathize with the former, and having collected all the other wives
together, should get them to denounce the favourite as a scheming and
wicked woman, without however committing herself in any way. If the
favourite wife happens to quarrel with the husband, then the elder wife
should take her part and give her false encouragement, and thus cause
the quarrel to be increased. If there be only a little quarrel between
the two, the elder wife should do all she can to work it up into a large
quarrel. But if after all this she finds the husband still continues to
love his favourite wife she should then change her tactics, and
endeavour to bring about a conciliation between them, so as to avoid her
husband's displeasure.

Thus ends the conduct of the elder wife.

The younger wife should regard the elder wife of her husband as her
mother, and should not give anything away, even to her own relations,
without her knowledge. She should tell her everything about herself, and
not approach her husband without her permission. Whatever is told to her
by the elder wife she should not reveal to others, and she should take
care of the children of the senior even more than of her own. When alone
with her husband she should serve him well, but should not tell him of
the pain she suffers from the existence of a rival wife. She may also
obtain secretly from her husband some marks of his particular regard for
her, and may tell him that she lives only for him, and for the regard
that he has for her. She should never reveal her love for her husband,
nor her husband's love for her to any person, either in pride or in
anger, for a wife that reveals the secrets of her husband is despised by
him. As for seeking to obtain the regard of her husband, Gonardiya says,
that it should always be done in private, for fear of the elder wife. If
the elder wife be disliked by her husband, or be childless, she should
sympathize with her, and should ask her husband to do the same, but
should surpass her in leading the life of a chaste woman.

Thus ends the conduct of the younger wife towards the elder.

A widow in poor circumstances, or of a weak nature, and who allies
herself again to a man, is called a widow re-married.

The followers of Babhravya say that a virgin widow should not marry a
person whom she may be obliged to leave on account of his bad character,
or of his being destitute of the excellent qualities of a man, she thus
being obliged to have recourse to another person. Gonardya is of opinion
that as the cause of a widow's marrying again is her desire for
happiness, and as happiness is secured by the possession of excellent
qualities in her husband, joined to love of enjoyment, it is better
therefore to secure a person endowed with such qualities in the first
instance. Vatsyayana however thinks that a widow may marry any person
that she likes, and that she thinks will suit her.

At the time of her marriage the widow should obtain from her husband the
money to pay the cost of drinking parties, and picnics with her
relations, and of giving them and her friends kindly gifts and presents;
or she may do these things at her own cost if she likes. In the same way
she may wear either her husband's ornaments or her own. As to the
presents of affection mutually exchanged between the husband and herself
there is no fixed rule about them. If she leaves her husband after
marriage of her own accord, she should restore to him whatever he may
have given her, with the exception of the mutual presents. If however
she is driven out of the house by her husband she should not return
anything to him.

After her marriage she should live in the house of her husband like one
of the chief members of the family, but should treat the other ladies of
the family with kindness, the servants with generosity, and all the
friends of the house with familiarity and good temper. She should show
that she is better acquainted with the sixty-four arts than the other
ladies of the house, and in any quarrels with her husband she should not
rebuke him severely, but in private do everything that he wishes, and
make use of the sixty-four ways of enjoyment. She should be obliging to
the other wives of her husband, and to their children she should give
presents, behave as their mistress, and make ornaments and play things
for their use. In the friends and servants of her husband she should
confide more than in his other wives, and finally she should have a
liking for drinking parties, going to picnics, attending fairs and
festivals, and for carrying out all kinds of games and amusements.

Thus ends the conduct of a virgin widow re-married.

A woman who is disliked by her husband, and annoyed and distressed by
his other wives, should associate with the wife who is liked most by her
husband, and who serves him more than the others, and should teach her
all the arts with which she is acquainted. She should act as the nurse
of her husband's children, and having gained over his friends to her
side, should through them make him acquainted of her devotion to him. In
religious ceremonies she should be a leader, as also in vows and fasts,
and should not hold too good an opinion of herself. When her husband is
lying on his bed she should only go near him when it is agreeable to
him, and should never rebuke him, or show obstinacy in any way. If her
husband happens to quarrel with any of his other wives, she should
reconcile them to each other, and if he desires to see any woman
secretly, she should manage to bring about the meeting between them. She
should moreover make herself acquainted with the weak points of her
husband's character, but always keep them secret, and on the whole
behave herself in such an way as may lead him to look upon her as a good
and devoted wife.

Here ends the conduct of a wife disliked by her husband.

The above sections will show how all the women of the King's seraglio
are to behave, and therefore we shall now speak separately only about
the king.

The female attendants in the harem (called severally Kanchukiyas,[54]
Mahallarikas,[55] and Mahallikas,[56]) should bring flowers, ointments
and clothes from the King's wives to the King, and he having received
these things should give them as presents to the servants, along with
the things worn by him the previous day. In the afternoon the King,
having dressed and put on his ornaments, should interview the women of
the harem, who should also be dressed and decorated with jewels. Then
having given to each of them such a place and such respect as may suit
the occasion and as they may deserve, he should carry on with them a
cheerful conversation. After that he should see such of his wives as may
be virgin widows re-married, and after them the concubines and dancing
girls. All of these should be visited in their own private rooms.

When the King rises from his noonday sleep, the woman whose duty it is
to inform the King regarding the wife who is to spend the night with him
should come to him accompanied by the female attendants of that wife
whose turn may have arrived in the regular course, and of her who may
have been accidentally passed over as her turn arrived, and of her who
may have been unwell at the time of her turn. These attendants should
place before the King the ointments and unguents sent by each of these
wives, marked with the seal of her ring, and their names and their
reasons for sending the ointments should be told to the King. After this
the King accepts the ointment of one of them, who then is informed that
her ointment has been accepted, and that her day has been settled.[57]

At festivals, singing parties and exhibitions, all the wives of the King
should be treated with respect and served with drinks.

But the women of the harem should not be allowed to go out alone,
neither should any women outside the harem be allowed to enter it except
those whose character is well known. And lastly the work which the
King's wives have to do should not be too fatiguing.

Thus ends the conduct of the King towards the women of the harem, and of
their own conduct.

A man marrying many wives should act fairly towards them all. He should
neither disregard nor pass over their faults, and should not reveal to
one wife the love, passion, bodily blemishes, and confidential
reproaches of the other. No opportunity should be given to any one of
them of speaking to him about their rivals, and if one of them should
begin to speak ill of another, he should chide her and tell her that she
has exactly the same blemishes in her character. One of them he should
please by secret confidence, another by secret respect, and another by
secret flattery, and he should please them all by going to gardens, by
amusements, by presents, by honouring their relations, by telling them
secrets, and lastly by loving unions. A young woman who is of a good
temper, and who conducts herself according to the precepts of the Holy
Writ, wins her husband's attachment, and obtains a superiority over her
rivals.

Thus ends the conduct of a husband towards many wives.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 54: A name given to the maid servants of the zenana of the
Kings in ancient times, on account of their always keeping their breasts
covered with a cloth called Kanchuki. It was customary in the olden time
for the maid servants to cover their breasts with a cloth, while the
Queens kept their breasts uncovered. This custom is distinctly to be
seen in the Ajunta cave paintings.]

[Footnote 55: The meaning of this word is a superior woman, so it would
seem that a Mahallarika must be a person in authority over the maid
servants of the house.]

[Footnote 56: This was also appertaining to the rank of women employed
in the harem. In latter times this place was given to eunuchs.]

[Footnote 57: As Kings generally had many wives, it was usual for them
to enjoy their wives by turns. But as it happened sometimes that some of
them lost their turns owing to the King's absence, or to their being
unwell, then in such cases the women whose turns had been passed over,
and those whose turns had come, used to have a sort of lottery, and the
ointment of all the claimants were sent to the King, who accepted the
ointment of one of them, and thus settled the question.]

=END OF PART IV.=




PART V.

ABOUT THE WIVES OF OTHER MEN.




CHAPTER I.

OF THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MEN AND WOMEN.--THE REASONS WHY WOMEN REJECT
THE ADDRESSES OF MEN.--ABOUT MEN WHO HAVE SUCCESS WITH WOMEN, AND ABOUT
WOMEN WHO ARE EASILY GAINED OVER.


The wives of other people may be resorted to on the occasions already
described in Part I., Chapter 5, of this work, but the possibility of
their acquisition, their fitness for cohabitation, the danger to oneself
in uniting with them, and the future effect of these unions, should
first of all be examined. A man may resort to the wife of another, for
the purpose of saving his own life, when he perceives that his love for
her proceeds from one degree of intensity to another. These degrees are
ten in number, and are distinguished by the following marks:

1. Love of the eye.

2. Attachment of the mind.

3. Constant reflection.

4. Destruction of sleep.

5. Emaciation of the body.

6. Turning away from objects of enjoyment.

7. Removal of shame.

8. Madness.

9. Fainting.

10. Death.

Ancient authors say that a man should know the disposition,
truthfulness, purity, and will of a young woman, as also the intensity,
or weakness of her passions, from the form of her body, and from her
characteristic marks and signs. But Vatsyayana is of opinion that the
forms of bodies, and the characteristic marks or signs are but erring
tests of character, and that women should be judged by their conduct, by
the outward expression of their thoughts, and by the movements of their
bodies.

Now as a general rule Gonikaputra says that a woman falls in love with
every handsome man she sees, and so does every man at the sight of a
beautiful woman, but frequently they do not take any further steps,
owing to various considerations. In love the following circumstances are
peculiar to the woman. She loves without regard to right or wrong,[58]
and does not try to gain over a man simply for the attainment of some
particular purpose. Moreover, when a man first makes up to her she
naturally shrinks from him, even though she may be willing to unite
herself with him. But when the attempts to gain her are repeated and
renewed, she at last consents. But with a man, even though he may have
begun to love, he conquers his feelings from a regard for morality and
wisdom, and although his thoughts are often on the woman, he does not
yield, even though an attempt be made to gain him over. He sometimes
makes an attempt or effort to win the object of his affections, and
having failed, he leaves her alone for the future. In the same way, when
a woman is once gained, he often becomes indifferent about her. As for
the saying that a man does not care for what is easily gained, and only
desires a thing which cannot be obtained without difficulty, it is only
a matter of talk.

The causes of a woman rejecting the addresses of a man are as follows:

1. Affection for her husband.

2. Desire of lawful progeny.

3. Want of opportunity.

4. Anger at being addressed by the man too familiarly.

5. Difference in rank of life.

6. Want of certainty on account of the man being devoted to travelling.

7. Thinking that the man may be attached to some other person.

8. Fear of the man's not keeping his intentions secret.

9. Thinking that the man is too devoted to his friends, and has too
great a regard for them.

10. The apprehension that he is not in earnest.

11. Bashfulness on account of his being an illustrious man.

12. Fear on account of his being powerful, or possessed of too impetuous
passion, in the case of the deer woman.

13. Bashfulness on account of his being too clever.

14. The thought of having once lived with him on friendly terms only.

15. Contempt of his want of knowledge of the world.

16. Distrust of his low character.

17. Disgust at his want of perception of her love for him.

18. In the case of an elephant woman, the thought that he is a hare man,
or a man of weak passion.

19. Compassion lest any thing should befall him on account of his
passion.

20. Despair at her own imperfections.

21. Fear of discovery.

22. Disillusion at seeing his grey hair or shabby appearance.

23. Fear that he may be employed by her husband to test her chastity.

24. The thought that he has too much regard for morality.

Whichever of the above causes a man may detect, he should endeavour to
remove it from the very beginning. Thus, the bashfulness that may arise
from his greatness or his ability, he should remove by showing his great
love and affection for her. The difficulty of the want of opportunity,
or if his inaccessibility, he should remove by showing her some easy way
of access. The excessive respect entertained by the woman for him should
be removed by making himself very familiar. The difficulties that arise
from his being thought a low character he should remove by showing his
valour and his wisdom; those that come from neglect by extra attention;
and those that arise from fear by giving her proper encouragement.

The following are the men who generally obtain success with women.

1. Men well versed in the science of love.

2. Men skilled in telling stories.

3. Men acquainted with women from their childhood.

4. Men who have secured their confidence.

5. Men who send presents to them.

6. Men who talk well.

7. Men who do things that they like.

8. Men who have not loved other women previously.

9. Men who act as messengers.

10. Men who knew their weak points.

11. Men who are desired by good women.

12. Men who are united with their female friends.

13. Men who are good looking.

14. Men who have been brought up with them.

15. Men who are their neighbours.

16. Men who are devoted to sexual pleasures, even though these be their
own servants.

17. The lovers of the daughters of their nurse.

18. Men who have been lately married.

19. Men who like picnics and pleasure parties.

20. Men who are liberal.

21. Men who are celebrated for being very strong (Bull men).

22. Enterprising and brave men.

23. Men who surpass their husbands in learning and good looks, in good
quality, and in liberality.

24. Men whose dress and manner of living are magnificent.

The following are the women who are easily gained over.

1. Women who stand at the doors of their houses.

2. Women who are always looking out on the street.

3. Women who sit conversing in their neighbour's house.

4. A woman who is always staring at you.

5. A female messenger.

6. A woman who looks sideways at you.

7. A woman whose husband has taken another wife without any just cause.

8. A woman who hates her husband or who is hated by him.

9. A woman who has nobody to look after her, or keep her in check.

10. A woman who has not had any children.

11. A woman whose family or caste is not well known.

12. A woman whose children are dead.

13. A woman who is very fond of society.

14. A woman who is apparently very affectionate with her husband.

15. The wife of an actor.

16. A widow.

17. A poor woman.

18. A woman fond of enjoyments.

19. The wife of a man with many younger brothers.

20. A vain woman.

21. A woman whose husband is inferior to her in rank or abilities.

22. A woman who is proud of her skill in the arts.

23. A woman disturbed in mind by the folly of her husband.

24. A woman who has been married in her infancy to a rich man, and not
liking him when she grows up, desires a man possessing a disposition,
talents, and wisdom suitable to her own tastes.

25. A woman who is slighted by her husband without any cause.

26. A woman who is not respected by other women of the same rank or
beauty as herself.

27. A woman whose husband is devoted to travelling.

28. The wife of a jeweller.

29. A jealous woman.

30. A covetous woman.

31. An immoral woman.

32. A barren woman.

33. A lazy woman.

34. A cowardly woman.

35. A humpbacked woman.

36. A dwarfish woman.

37. A deformed woman.

38. A vulgar woman.

39. An ill-smelling woman.

40. A sick woman.

41. An old woman.

There was also two verses on the subject as follows:

"Desire, which springs from nature, and which is increased by art, and
from which all danger is taken away by wisdom, becomes firm and secure.
A clever man, depending on his own ability, and observing carefully the
ideas and thoughts of women, and removing the causes of their turning
away from men, is generally successful with them."

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 58: On peut tout attendre et tout supposer d'une femme
amoureuse.--Balzac.]




CHAPTER II.

ABOUT MAKING ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE WOMAN, AND OF THE EFFORTS TO GAIN HER
OVER.


Ancient authors are of opinion that girls are not so easily seduced by
employing female messengers as by the efforts of the man himself, but
that the wives of others are more easily got at by the aid of female
messengers than by the personal efforts of a man. But Vatsyayana lays it
down that whenever it is possible a man should always act himself in
these matters, and it is only when such is impracticable, or impossible,
that female messengers should be employed. As for the saying that women
who act and talk boldly and freely are to be won by the personal efforts
of the man, and that women who do not possess those qualities are to be
got at by female messengers, it is only a matter of talk.

Now when a man acts himself in the matter he should first of all make
the acquaintance of the woman he loves in the following manner.

1st. He should arrange to be seen by the woman either on a natural or
special opportunity. A natural opportunity is when one of them goes to
the house of the other, and a special opportunity is when they meet
either at the house of a friend, or a caste-fellow, or a minister, or a
physician, as also on the occasion of marriage ceremonies, sacrifices,
festivals, funerals, and garden parties.

2nd. When they do meet, the man should be careful to look at her in such
a way as to cause the state of his mind to be made known to her; he
should pull about his moustache, make a sound with his nails, cause his
own ornaments to tinkle, bite his lower lip, and make various other
signs of that description. When she is looking at him he should speak
to his friends about her and other women, and should show to her his
liberality and his appreciation of enjoyments. When sitting by the side
of a female friend he should yawn and twist his body, contract his
eyebrows, speak very slowly as if he were weary, and listen to her
indifferently. A conversation having two meanings should also be carried
on with a child or some other person, apparently having regard to a
third person, but really having reference to the woman he loves, and in
this way his love should be made manifest under the pretext of referring
to others rather than to herself. He should make marks that have
reference to her, on the earth with his nails, or with a stick, and
should embrace and kiss a child in her presence, and give it the mixture
of betel nut and betel leaves with his tongue, and press its chin with
his fingers in a caressing way. All these things should be done at the
proper time and in proper places.

3rd. The man should fondle a child that may be sitting on her lap, and
give it something to play with, and also take the same back again.
Conversation with respect to the child may also be held with her, and in
this manner he should gradually become well acquainted with her, and he
should also make himself agreeable to her relations. Afterwards, this
acquaintance should be made a pretext for visiting her house frequently,
and on such occasions he should converse on the subject of love in her
absence, but within her hearing. As his intimacy with her increases he
should place in her charge some kind of deposit or trust, and take away
from it a small portion at a time; or he may give her some fragrant
substances, or betel nuts to be kept for him by her. After this he
should endeavour to make her well acquainted with his own wife, and get
them to carry on confidential conversations, and to sit together in
lonely places. In order to see her frequently he should arrange that the
same goldsmith, the same jeweller, the same basket maker, the same dyer,
and the same washerman should be employed by the two families. And he
should also pay her long visits openly under the pretence of being
engaged with her on business, and one business should lead to another,
so as to keep up the intercourse between them. Whenever she wants
anything, or is in need of money, or wishes to acquire skill in one of
the arts, he should cause her to understand that he is willing and able
to do anything that she wants, to give her money, or teach her one of
the arts, all these things being quite within his ability and power. In
the same way he should hold discussions with her in company with other
people, and they should talk of the doings and sayings of other persons,
and examine different things, like jewellery, precious stones, etc. On
such occasions he should show her certain things with the values of
which she may be unacquainted, and if she begins to dispute with him
about the things or their value, he should not contradict her, but point
out that he agrees with her in every way.

Thus ends the ways of making the acquaintance of the woman desired.

Now after a girl has become acquainted with the man as above described,
and has manifested her love to him by the various outward signs; and by
the motions of her body, the man should make every effort to gain her
over. But as girls are not acquainted with sexual union, they should be
treated with the greatest delicacy, and the man should proceed with
considerable caution, though in the case of other women, accustomed to
sexual intercourse, this is not necessary. When the intentions of the
girl are known, and her bashfulness put aside, the man should begin to
make use of her money, and an interchange of clothes, rings, and flowers
should be made. In this the man should take particular care that the
things given by him are handsome and valuable. He should moreover
receive from her a mixture of betel nut and betel leaves, and when he is
going to a party he should ask for the flower in her hair, or for the
flower in her hand. If he himself gives her a flower it should be a
sweet smelling one, and marked with marks made by his nails or teeth.
With increasing assiduity he should dispel her fears, and by degrees get
her to go with him to some lonely place, and there he should embrace and
kiss her. And finally at the time of giving her some betel nut, or of
receiving the same from her, or at the time of making an exchange of
flowers, he should touch and press her private parts, thus bringing his
efforts to a satisfactory conclusion.

When a man is endeavouring to seduce one woman, he should not attempt to
seduce any other at the same time. But after he had succeeded with the
first, and enjoyed her for a considerable time, he can keep her
affections by giving her presents that she likes, and then commence
making up to another woman. When a man sees the husband of a woman going
to some place near his house, he should not enjoy the woman then, even
though she may be easily gained over at that time. A wise man having a
regard for his reputation should not think of seducing a woman who is
apprehensive, timid, not to be trusted, well guarded, or possessed of a
father-in-law, or mother-in-law.




CHAPTER III.

EXAMINATION OF THE STATE OF A WOMAN'S MIND.


When a man is trying to gain over a woman he should examine the state of
her mind, and acts as follows.

If she listens to him, but does not manifest to him in any way her own
intentions, he should then try to gain her over by means of a
go-between.

If she meets him once, and again comes to meet him better dressed than
before, or comes to him in some lonely place, he should be certain that
she is capable of being enjoyed by the use of a little force. A woman
who lets a man make up to her, but does not give herself up, even after
a long time, should be considered as a trifler in love, but owing to the
fickleness of the human mind, even such a woman can be conquered by
always keeping up a close acquaintance with her.

When a woman avoids the attentions of a man, and on account of respect
for him, and pride in herself, will not meet him or approach him, she
can be gained over with difficulty, either by endeavouring to keep on
familiar terms with her, or else by an exceedingly clever go-between.

When a man makes up to a woman, and she reproaches him with harsh words,
she should be abandoned at once.

When a woman reproaches a man, but at the same time acts affectionately
towards him, she should be made love to in every way.

A woman who meets a man in lonely places, and puts up with the touch of
his foot, but pretends, on account of the indecision of her mind, not to
be aware of it, should be conquered by patience, and by continued
efforts as follows:

If she happens to go to sleep in his vicinity he should put his left arm
round her, and see when she awakes whether she repulses him in reality,
or only repulses him in such a way as if she were desirous of the same
thing being done to her again. And what is done by the arm can also be
done by the foot. If the man succeeds in this point he should embrace
her more closely, and if she will not stand the embrace and gets up, but
behaves with him as usual the next day, he should consider then that she
is not unwilling to be enjoyed by him. If however she does not appear
again, the man should try to get over her by means of a go-between; and
if, after having disappeared for some time she again appears, and
behaves with him as usual, the man should then consider that she would
not object to be united with him.

When a woman gives a man an opportunity, and makes her own love manifest
to him, he should proceed to enjoy her. And the signs of a woman
manifesting her love are these:

1. She calls out to a man without being addressed by him in the first
instance.

2. She shows herself to him in secret places.

3. She speaks to him tremblingly and inarticulately.

4. She has the fingers of her hand, and the toes of her feet moistened
with perspiration, and her face blooming with delight.

5. She occupies herself with shampooing his body and pressing his head.

6. When shampooing him she works with one hand only, and with the other
she touches and embraces parts of his body.

7. She remains with both hands placed on his body motionless as if she
had been surprised by something, or was overcome by fatigue.

8. She sometimes bends down her face upon his thighs, and when asked to
shampoo them does not manifest any unwillingness to do so.

9. She places one of her hands quite motionless on his body, and even
though the man should press it between two members of his body, she does
not remove it for a long time.

10. Lastly, when she has resisted all the efforts of the man to gain her
over, she returns to him next day to shampoo his body as before.

When a woman neither gives encouragement to a man, nor avoids him, but
hides herself and remains in some lonely place, she must be got at by
means of the female servant who may be near her. If when called by the
man she acts in the same way, then she should be gained over by means of
a skilful go-between. But if she will have nothing to say to the man, he
should consider well about her before he begins any further attempts to
gain her over.

Thus ends the examination of the state of a woman's mind.

A man should first get himself introduced to a woman, and then carry on
a conversation with her. He should give her hints of his love for her,
and if he finds from her replies that she receives these hints
favourably, he should then set to work to gain her over without any
fear. A woman who shows her love by outward signs to the man at his
first interview should be gained over very easily. In the same way a
lascivious woman, who when addressed in loving words replies openly in
words expressive of her love, should be considered to have been gained
over at that very moment. With regard to all women, whether they be
wise, simple, or confiding, this rule is laid down that those who make
an open manifestation of their love are easily gained over.




CHAPTER IV.

ABOUT THE BUSINESS OF A GO-BETWEEN.


If a woman has manifested her love or desire, either by signs or by
motions of her body, and is afterwards rarely or never seen any where,
or if a woman is met for the first time, the man should get a go-between
to approach her.

Now the go-between, having wheedled herself into the confidence of the
woman by acting according to her disposition, should try to make her
hate or despise her husband by holding artful conversations with her, by
telling her about medicines for getting children, by talking to her
about other people, by tales of various kinds, by stories about the
wives of other men, and by praising her beauty, wisdom, generosity, and
good nature, and then saying to her: "It is indeed a pity that you, who
are so excellent a woman in every way, should be possessed of a husband
of this kind. Beautiful lady, he is not fit even to serve you." The
go-between should further talk to the woman about the weakness of the
passion of her husband, his jealousy, his roguery, his ingratitude, his
aversion to enjoyments, his dullness, his meanness, and all the other
faults that he may have, and with which she may be acquainted. She
should particularly harp upon that fault or that failing by which the
wife may appear to be the most affected. If the wife be a deer woman,
and the husband a hare man, then there would be no fault in that
direction, but in the event of his being a hare man, and she a mare
woman or elephant woman, then this fault should be pointed out to her.

Gonikaputra is of opinion that when it is the first affair of the woman,
or when her love has only been very secretly shown, the man should then
secure and send to her a go-between, with whom she may be already
acquainted, and in whom she confides.

But to return to our subject. The go-between should tell the woman about
the obedience and love of the man, and as her confidence and affection
increase, she should then explain to her the thing to be accomplished in
the following way. "Hear this, Oh beautiful lady, that this man, born of
a good family, having seen you, has gone mad on your account. The poor
young man, who is tender by nature, has never been distressed in such a
way before, and it is highly probable that he will succumb under his
present affliction, and experience the pains of death." If the woman
listens with a favourable ear, then on the following day the go-between,
having observed marks of good spirits in her face, in her eyes, and in
her manner of conversation, should again converse with her on the
subject of the man, and should tell her the stories of Ahalya[59] and
Indra, of Sakoontala[60] and Dushyanti, and such others as may be fitted
for the occasion. She should also describe to her the strength of the
man, his talents, his skill in the sixty-four sorts of enjoyments
mentioned by Babhravya, his good looks, and his liaison with some
praiseworthy woman, no matter whether this last ever took place or not.

In addition to this, the go-between should carefully note the behaviour
of the woman, which if favourable would be as follows: She would address
her with a smiling look, would seat herself close beside her, and ask
her, "Where have you been? What have you been doing? Where did you dine?
Where did you sleep? Where have you been sitting?" Moreover the woman
would meet the go-between in lonely places and tell her stories there,
would yawn contemplatively, draw long sighs, give her presents, remember
her on occasions of festivals, dismiss her with a wish to see her again,
and say to her jestingly, "Oh, well-speaking woman, why do you speak
these bad words to me?" would discourse on the sin of her union with the
man, would not tell her about any previous visits or conversations that
she may have had with him, but wish to be asked about these, and lastly
would laugh at the man's desire, but would not reproach him in any way.

Thus ends the behaviour of the woman with the go-between.

When the woman manifests her love in the manner above described, the
go-between should increase it by bringing to her love tokens from the
man. But if the woman be not acquainted with the man personally, the
go-between should win her over by extolling and praising his good
qualities, and by telling stories about his love for her. Here Auddalaka
says that when a man or woman are not personally acquainted with each
other, and have not shown each other any signs of affection, the
employment of a go-between is useless.

The followers of Babhravya on the other hand affirm that even though
they be personally unacquainted, but have shown each other signs of
affection there is an occasion for the employment of a go-between.
Gonikaputra asserts that a go-between should be employed, provided they
are acquainted with each other, even though no signs of affection may
have passed between them. Vatsyayana however lays it down that even
though they may not be personally acquainted with each other, and may
not have shown each other any signs of affection, still they are both
capable of placing confidence in a go-between.

Now the go-between should show the woman the presents, such as the betel
nut and betel leaves, the perfumes, the flowers, and the rings which the
man may have given to her for the sake of the woman, and on these
presents should be impressed the marks of the man's teeth, and nails,
and other signs. On the cloth that he may send he should draw with
saffron both his hands joined together as if in earnest entreaty.

The go-between should also show to the woman ornamental figures of
various kinds cut in leaves, together with ear ornaments, and chaplets
made of flowers containing love letters expressive of the desire of the
man,[61] and she should cause her to send affectionate presents to the
man in return. After they have mutually accepted each other's presents,
then a meeting should be arranged between them on the faith of the
go-between.

The followers of Babhravya say that this meeting should take place at
the time of going to the temple of a Deity, or on occasions of fairs,
garden parties, theatrical performances, marriages, sacrifices,
festivals and funerals, as also at the time of going to the river to
bathe, or at times of natural calamities,[62] fear of robbers or hostile
invasions of the country.

Gonikaputra is of opinion however that these meetings had better be
brought about in the abodes of female friends, mendicants, astrologers,
and ascetics. But Vatsyayana decides that that place is only well suited
for the purpose which has proper means of ingress and egress, and where
arrangements have been made to prevent any accidental occurrence, and
when a man who has once entered the house, can also leave it at the
proper time without any disagreeable encounter.

Now go-betweens or female messengers are of the following different
kinds, viz.:

(1). A go-between who takes upon herself the whole burden of the
business.

(2). A go-between who does only a limited part of the business.

(3). A go-between who is the bearer of a letter only.

(4). A go-between acting on her own account.

(5). The go-between of an innocent young woman.

(6). A wife serving as a go-between.

(7). A mute go-between.

(8). A go-between who acts the part of the wind.

(1). A woman who, having observed the mutual passion of a man and woman,
brings them together and arranges it by the power of her own intellect,
such an one is called a go-between who takes upon herself the whole
burden of the business. This kind of go-between is chiefly employed when
the man and the woman are already acquainted with each other, and have
conversed together, and in such cases she is sent not only by the man
(as is always done in all other cases) but by the woman also.--The above
name is also given to a go-between who, perceiving that the man and the
woman are suited to each other, tries to bring about a union between
them, even though they be not acquainted with each other.

(2). A go-between who, perceiving that some part of the affair is
already done, or that the advances on the part of the man are already
made, completes the rest of the business, is called a go-between who
performs only a limited part of the business.

(3). A go-between, who simply carries messages between a man and a
woman, who love each other, but who cannot frequently meet, is called
the bearer of a letter or message.

This name is also given to one who is sent by either of the lovers to
acquaint either the one or the other with the time and place of their
meeting.

(4). A woman who goes herself to a man, and tells him of her having
enjoyed sexual union with him in a dream, and expresses her anger at his
wife having rebuked him for calling her by the name of her rival instead
of by her own name, and gives him something bearing the marks of her
teeth and nails, and informs him that she knew she was formerly desired
by him, and asks him privately whether she or his wife is the best
looking, such a person is called a woman who is a go-between for
herself. Now such a woman should be met and interviewed by the man in
private and secretly.

The above name is also given to a woman who having made an agreement
with some other woman to act as her go-between, gains over the man to
herself, by the means of making him personally acquainted with herself,
and thus causes the other woman to fail. The same applies to a man who,
acting as a go-between for another, and having no previous connection
with the woman, gains her over for himself, and thus causes the failure
of the other man.

(5). A woman, who has gained the confidence of the innocent young wife
of any man, and who has learned her secrets without exercising any
pressure on her mind, and found out from her how her husband behaves to
her, if this woman then teaches her the art of securing his favour, and
decorates her so as to show her love, and instructs her how and when to
be angry, or to pretend to be so, and then, having herself made marks of
the nails and teeth on the body of the wife, gets the latter to send for
her husband to show these marks to him, and thus excite him for
enjoyment, such is called the go-between of an innocent young woman. In
such cases the man should send replies to his wife through the same
woman.

(6). When a man gets his wife to gain the confidence of a woman whom he
wants to enjoy, and to call on her and talk to her about the wisdom and
ability of her husband, that wife is called a wife serving as a
go-between. In this case the feelings of the woman with regard to the
man should also be made known through the wife.

(7). When any man sends a girl or a female servant to any woman under
some pretext or other, and places a letter in her bouquet of flowers, or
in her ear ornaments, or marks something about her with his teeth or
nails, that girl or female servant is called a mute go-between. In this
case the man should expect an answer from the woman through the same
person.

(8). A person, who carries a message to a woman, which has a double
meaning, or which relates to some past transactions, or which is
unintelligible to other people, is called a go-between who acts the part
of the wind. In this case the reply should be asked for through the same
woman.

Thus end the different kinds of go-betweens.

A female astrologer, a female servant, a female beggar, or a female
artist are well acquainted with the business of a go-between, and very
soon gain the confidence of other women. Any one of them can raise
enmity between any two persons if she wishes to do so, or extol the
loveliness of any woman that she wishes to praise, or describe the arts
practised by other women in sexual union. They can also speak highly of
the love of a man, of his skill in sexual enjoyment, and of the desire
of other women, more beautiful even than the woman they are addressing,
for him, and explain the restraint under which he may be at home.

Lastly a go-between can, by the artfulness of her conversation unite a
woman with a man, even though he may not have been thought of by her, or
may have been considered beyond his aspirations. She can also bring back
a man to a woman, who, owing to some cause or other, has separated
himself from her.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 59: The wife of the sage Gautama, she was seduced by Indra the
king of the Gods.]

[Footnote 60: The heroine of one of the best, if not the best, of Hindoo
plays, and the best known in Sanscrit dramatic literature. It was first
brought to notice by Sir William Jones, and has been well and poetically
translated by Dr. Monier Williams under the title of Sakoontala, or the
lost ring, an Indian drama, translated into English prose and verse from
the Sanscrit of Kalidasa.]

[Footnote 61: It is presumed that something like the following French
verses are intended.

   Quand on a jur√© le plus profond hommage
   Voulez-vous qu'infid√® le on change de langage
   Vous seule captive mon esprit ou mon coeur
   Que je puisse dans vos bras seuls go√ªter le bonheur;
   Je voudrais, mais en vain, que mon coeur en d√©lire
   Couche o√π ce papier n'oserait vous dire.
   Avec soin, de ces vers lisez leur premiers mots,
   Vous verrez quel rem√®de il faut √† tous mes maux.

Or these:

   Quand on vous voit, on vous aime;
   Quand on vous aime, o√π vous voit-on.]

[Footnote 62: It is supposed that storms, earthquakes, famines and
pestilent diseases are here alluded to.]




CHAPTER V.

ABOUT THE LOVE OF PERSONS IN AUTHORITY FOR THE WIVES OF OTHER MEN.


Kings and their ministers have no access to the abodes of others, and
moreover their mode of living is constantly watched and observed and
imitated by the people at large, just as the animal world, seeing the
sun rise, get up after him, and when he sits in the evening, lie down
again in the same way. Persons in authority should not therefore do any
improper act in public, as such are impossible from their position, and
would be deserving of censure. But if they find that such an act is
necessary to be done, they should make use of the proper means as
described in the following paragraphs.

The head man of the village, the King's officer employed there, and the
man[63] whose business it is to glean corn, can gain over female
villagers simply by asking them. It is on this account that this class
of woman are called unchaste women by voluptuaries.

The union of the above mentioned men with this class of woman takes
place on the occasions of unpaid labour, of filling the granaries in
their houses, of taking things in and out of the house, of cleaning the
houses, of working in the fields, and of purchasing cotton, wool, flax,
hemp, and thread, and at the season of the purchase, sale, and exchange
of various other articles, as well as at the time of doing various other
works. In the same way the superintendents of cow pens enjoy the women
in the cow pens; and the officers, who have the superintendence of
widows, of the women who are without supporters, and of women who have
left their husbands, have sexual intercourse with these women. The
intelligent accomplish their object by wandering at night in the
village, and while villagers also unite with the wives of their sons,
being much alone with them. Lastly the superintendents of markets have a
great deal to do with the female villagers at the time of their making
purchases in the market.

During the festival of the eighth moon, _i.e._, during the bright half
of the month of Nargashirsha, as also during the moonlight festival of
the month of Kartika, and the spring festival of Chaitra, the women of
cities and towns generally visit the women of the King's harem in the
royal palace. These visitors go to the several apartments of the women
of the harem, as they are acquainted with them, and pass the night in
conversation, and in proper sports, and amusement, and go away in the
morning. On such occasions a female attendant of the King (previously
acquainted with the woman whom the King desires), should loiter about,
and accost this woman when she sets out to go home, and induce her to
come and see the amusing things in the palace. Previous to these
festivals even, she should have caused it to be intimated to this woman
that on the occasion of this festival she would show her all the
interesting things in the royal palace. Accordingly she should show her
the bower of the coral creeper, the garden house with its floor inlaid
with precious stones, the bower of grapes, the building on the water,
the secret passages in the walls of the palace, the pictures, the
sporting animals, the machines, the birds, and the cages of the lions
and the tigers. After this, when alone with her, she should tell her
about the love of the King for her, and should describe to her the good
fortune which would attend upon her union with the King, giving her at
the time a strict promise of secrecy. If the woman does not accept the
offer, she should conciliate and please her with handsome presents
befitting the position of the King, and having accompanied her for some
distance should dismiss her with great affection.

(2). Or, having made the acquaintance of the husband of the woman whom
the King desires, the wives of the King should get the wife to pay them
a visit in the harem, and on this occasion a female attendant of the
King, having been sent thither, should act as above described.

(3). Or, one of the King's wives should get acquainted with the woman
that the King desires, by sending one of the female attendants to her,
who should, on their becoming more intimate, induce her to come and see
the royal abode. Afterwards, when she has visited the harem, and
acquired confidence, a female confidante of the King, sent thither,
should act as before described.

(4). Or, the King's wife should invite the woman, whom the King desires,
to come to the royal palace, so that she might see the practice of the
art in which the King's wife may be skilled, and after she has come to
the harem, a female attendant of the King, sent thither, should act as
before described.

(5). Or, a female beggar, in league with the King's wife, should say to
the woman desired by the King, and whose husband may have lost his
wealth, or may have some cause of fear from the King: "This wife of the
King has influence over him, and she is, moreover, naturally
kind-hearted, we must therefore go to her in this matter. I shall
arrange for your entrance into the harem, and she will do away with all
cause of danger and fear from the King." If the woman accepts this
offer, the female beggar should take her two or three times to the
harem, and the King's wife there should give her a promise of
protection. After this, when the woman, delighted with her reception and
promise of protection, again goes to the harem, then a female attendant
of the King, sent thither, should act as directed.

(6). What has been said above regarding the wife of one who has some
cause of fear from the King applies also to the wives of those who seek
service under the King, or who are oppressed by the King's ministers, or
who are poor, or who are not satisfied with their position, or who are
desirous of gaining the King's favour, or who wish to become famous
among the people, or who are oppressed by the members of their own
caste, or who want to injure their caste fellows, or who are spies of
the King, or who have any other object to attain.

(7). Lastly, if the woman desired by the King be living with some person
who is not her husband, then the King should cause her to be arrested,
and having made her a slave, on account of her crime, should place her
in the harem. Or the King should cause his ambassador to quarrel with
the husband of the woman desired by him, and should then imprison her as
the wife of an enemy of the King, and by this means should place her in
the harem.

Thus end the means of gaining over the wives of others secretly.

The above mentioned ways of gaining over the wives of other men are
chiefly practised in the palaces of Kings. But a King should never enter
the abode of another person, for Abhira,[64] the King of the Kottas was
killed by a washerman while in the house of another, and in the same way
Jayasana the King of the Kashis was slain by the commandment of his
cavalry.

But according to the customs of some countries there are facilities for
Kings to make love to the wives of other men. Thus in the country of the
Andras[65] the newly married daughters of the people thereof enter the
King's harem with some presents on the tenth day of their marriage, and
having been enjoyed by the King are then dismissed. In the country of
the Vatsagulmas[66] the wives of the chief ministers approach the King
at night to serve him. In the country of the Vaidarbhas[67] the
beautiful wives of the inhabitants pass a month in the King's harem
under the pretence of affection for the King. In the country of the
Aparatakas[68] the people gave their beautiful wives as presents to the
ministers and the Kings. And lastly in the country of the
Saurashtras[69] the women of the city and the country enter the royal
harem for the King's pleasure either together or separately.

There are also two verses on the subject as follows:

"The above and other ways are the means employed in different countries
by Kings with regard to the wives of other persons. But a King, who has
the welfare of his people at heart, should not on any account put them
into practice."

"A King who has conquered the six[70] enemies of mankind, becomes the
master of the whole earth."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 63: This is a phrase used for a man who does the work of
everybody, and who is fed by the whole village.]

[Footnote 64: The exact date of the reign of these kings is not known.
It is supposed to have been about the beginning of the Christian era.]

[Footnote 65: The modern country of Tailangam, which is to the South of
Rajamundry.]

[Footnote 66: Supposed to be a tract of the country to the south of
Malwa.]

[Footnote 67: Now known by the name of Berar. Its capital was
Kundinpura, which has been identified with the modern Oomravati.]

[Footnote 68: Also called Aparantakas, being the northern and southern
Concan.]

[Footnote 69: The modern provinces of Katteeawar. Its capital was called
Girinaguda, or the modern Junagurh.]

[Footnote 70: These are Lust, Anger, Avarice, Spiritual Ignorance,
Pride, and Envy.]




CHAPTER VI.

ABOUT THE WOMEN OF THE ROYAL HAREM; AND OF THE KEEPING OF ONE'S OWN
WIFE.


The women of the royal harem cannot see or meet any men on account of
their being strictly guarded, neither do they have their desires
satisfied, because their only husband is common to many wives. For this
reason among themselves they give pleasure to each other in various ways
as now described.

Having dressed the daughters of their nurses, or their female friends,
or their female attendants, like men, they accomplish their object by
means of bulbs, roots, and fruits having the form of the Lingam, or they
lie down upon the statue of a male figure, in which the Lingam is
visible and erect.

Some Kings, who are compassionate, take or apply certain medicines to
enable them to enjoy many wives in one night, simply for the purpose of
satisfying the desire of their women, though they perhaps have no desire
of their own. Others enjoy with great affection only those wives that
they particularly like, while others only take them according as the
turn of each wife arrives in due course. Such are the ways of enjoyment
prevalent in Eastern countries, and what is said about the means of
enjoyment of the female is also applicable to the male.

By means of their female attendants the ladies of the royal harem
generally get men into their apartments in the disguise or dress of
women. Their female attendants, and the daughters of their nurses, who
are acquainted with their secrets, should exert themselves to get men to
come to the harem in this way by telling them of the good fortune
attending it, and by describing the facilities of entering and leaving
the palace, the large size of the premises, the carelessness of the
sentinels, and the irregularities of the attendants about the persons of
the royal wives. But these women should never induce a man to enter the
harem by telling him falsehoods, for that would probably lead to his
destruction.

As for the man himself, he had better not enter a royal harem, even
though it may be easily accessible, on account of the numerous disasters
to which he may be exposed there. If however he wants to enter it, he
should first ascertain whether there is an easy way to get out, whether
it is closely surrounded by the pleasure garden, whether it has separate
enclosures belonging to it, whether the sentinels are careless, whether
the King has gone abroad, and then, when he is called by the women of
the harem, he should carefully observe the localities, and enter by the
way pointed out by them. If he is able to manage it, he should hang
about the harem every day, and, under some pretext or other, make
friends with the sentinels, and show himself attached to the female
attendants of the harem, who may have become acquainted with his design,
and to whom he should express his regret at not being able to obtain the
object of his desire. Lastly he should cause the whole business of a
go-between to be done by the woman who may have access to the harem, and
he should be careful to be able to recognize the emissaries of the King.

When a go-between has no access to the harem, then the man should stand
in some place where the lady, whom he loves, and whom he is anxious to
enjoy, can be seen.

If that place is occupied by the King's sentinels, he should then
disguise himself as a female attendant of the lady who comes to the
place, or passes by it. When she looks at him he should let her know his
feelings by outward signs and gestures, and should show her pictures,
things with double meanings, chaplets of flowers, and rings. He should
carefully mark the answer she gives, whether by word or by sign, or by
gesture, and should then try and get into the harem. If he is certain of
her coming to some particular place he should conceal himself there, and
at the appointed time should enter along with her as one of the guards.
He may also go in and out, concealed in a folded bed, or bed covering,
or with his body made invisible,[71] by means of external applications,
a receipt for one of which is as follows:

The heart of an ichneumon, the fruit of the long gourd (Tumbi), and the
eyes of the serpent, should all be burnt without letting out the smoke,
the ashes should then be ground and mixed in equal quantities with
water. By putting this mixture upon the eyes a man can go about unseen.

Other means of invisibility are prescribed by Duyana Brahmans and
Jogashiras.

Again the man may enter the harem during the festival of the eight moon
in the month of Nargashirsha, and during the moonlight festivals when
the female attendants of the harem are all busily occupied, or in
confusion.

The following principles are laid down on this subject.

The entrance of young men into harems, and their exit from them,
generally take place when things are being brought into the palace, or
when things are being taken out of it, or when drinking festivals are
going on, or when the female attendants are in a hurry, or when the
residence of some of the royal ladies is being changed, or when the
King's wives go to gardens, or to fairs, or when they enter the palace
on their return from them; or, lastly, when the King is absent on a long
pilgrimage. The women of the royal harem know each other's secrets, and
having but one object to attain, they give assistance to each other. A
young man, who enjoys all of them, and who is common to them all, can
continue enjoying his union with them so long as it is kept quiet, and
is not known abroad.

Now in the country of the Aparatakas the royal ladies are not well
protected, and consequently many young men are passed into the harem by
the women who have access to the royal palaces. The wives of the King of
the Ahira country accomplish their objects with those sentinels in the
harem who bear the name of Kashtriyas. The royal ladies in the country
of the Vatsagulmas cause such men as are suitable to enter into the
harem along with their female messengers. In the country of the
Vaidarbhas the sons of the royal ladies enter the royal harem when they
please, and enjoy the women, with the exception of their own mothers. In
the Stri-rajya the wives of the King are enjoyed by his caste fellows
and relations. In the Ganda country the royal wives are enjoyed by
Brahmans, friends, servants, and slaves. In the Samdhava country,
servants, foster children, and other persons like them enjoy the women
of the harem. In the country of the Haimavatas adventurous citizens
bribe the sentinels and enter the harem. In the country of the Vanyas
and the Kalmyas, Brahmans, with the knowledge of the King, enter the
harem under the pretence of giving flowers to the ladies, and speak with
them from behind a curtain, and from such conversation union afterwards
takes place. Lastly, the women in the harem of the King of the Prachyas
conceal one young man in the harem for every batch of nine or ten of the
women.

Thus act the wives of others.

For these reasons a man should guard his own wife. Old authors say that
a King should select for sentinels in his harem such men as have their
freedom from carnal desires well tested. But such men, though free
themselves from carnal desire, by reason of their fear or avarice, may
cause other persons to enter the harem, and therefore Gonikaputra says,
that Kings should place such men in the harem as may have had their
freedom from carnal desires, their fears, and their avarice well tested.
Lastly, Vatsyayana says that under the influence of Dharma[72] people
might be admitted, and therefore men should be selected who are free
from carnal desires, fear, avarice, and Dharma.[73]

The followers of Babhravya say that a man should cause his wife to
associate with a young woman who would tell him the secrets of other
people, and thus find out from her about his wife's chastity. But
Vatsyayana says, that as wicked persons are always successful with
women, a man should not cause his innocent wife to be corrupted by
bringing her into the company of a deceitful woman.

The following are the causes of the destruction of a woman's chastity:

Always going into society, and sitting in company.

Absence of restraint.

The loose habits of her husband.

Want of caution in her relations with other men.

Continued and long absence of her husband.

Living in a foreign country.

Destruction of her love and feelings by her husband.

The company of loose women.

The jealousy of her husband.

There are also the following verses on the subject.

"A clever man, learning from the Shastras the ways of winning over the
wives of other people, is never deceived in the case of his own wives.
No one, however, should make use of these ways for seducing the wives of
others, because they do not always succeed, and, moreover, often cause
disasters, and the destruction of Dharma and Artha. This book, which is
intended for the good of the people, and to teach them the ways of
guarding their own wives, should not be made use of merely for gaining
over the wives of others."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 71: The way to make oneself invisible; the knowledge of the
art of transmigration, or changing ourselves or others into any shape or
form by the use of charms and spells; the power of being in two places
at once, and other occult sciences are frequently referred to in all
Oriental literature.]

[Footnote 72: This may be considered as meaning religious influence, and
alludes to persons who may be gained over by that means.]

[Footnote 73: It may be noted from the above remarks that eunuchs do not
appear to have been employed in the King's harem in those days, though
they seem to have been employed for other purposes. See Part II., page
43.]

=END OF PART V.=




PART VI.

ABOUT COURTESANS.




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


This Part VI., about courtesans, was prepared by Vatsyayana, from a
treatise on the subject, that was written by Dattaka, for the women of
Pataliputra (the modern Patna), some two thousand years ago. Dattaka's
work does not appear to be extant now, but this abridgement of it is
very clever, and quite equal to any of the productions of Emile Zola,
and other writers of the realistic school of to-day.

Although a great deal has been written on the subject of the courtesan,
nowhere will be found a better description of her, of her belongings, of
her ideas, and of the working of her mind, than is contained in the
following pages.

The details of the domestic and social life of the early Hindoos would
not be complete without mention of the courtesan, and Part VI. is
entirely devoted to this subject. The Hindoos have ever had the good
sense to recognise courtesans as a part and portion of human society,
and so long as they behaved themselves with decency and propriety, they
were regarded with a certain respect. Anyhow, they have never been
treated in the East with that brutality and contempt so common in the
West, while their education has always been of a superior kind to that
bestowed upon the rest of womankind in Oriental countries.

In the earlier days the well-educated Hindoo dancing girl and courtesan
doubtless resembled the Hetera of the Greeks, and being educated and
amusing, were far more acceptable as companions than the generality of
the married or unmarried women of that period. At all times and in all
countries, there has ever been a little rivalry between the chaste and
the unchaste. But while some women are born courtesans, and follow the
instincts of their nature in every class of society, it has been truly
said by some authors that every woman has got an inkling of the
profession in her nature, and does her best, as a general rule, to make
herself agreeable to the male sex.

The subtlety of women, their wonderful perceptive powers, their
knowledge, and their intuitive appreciation of men and things, are all
shown in the following pages, which may be looked upon as a concentrated
essence that has been since worked up into detail by many writers in
every quarter of the globe.




CHAPTER I.

OF THE CAUSES OF A COURTESAN RESORTING TO MEN; OF THE MEANS OF ATTACHING
TO HERSELF THE MAN DESIRED; AND OF THE KIND OF MAN THAT IT IS DESIRABLE
TO BE ACQUAINTED WITH.


By having intercourse with men courtesans obtain sexual pleasure, as
well as their own maintenance. Now when a courtesan takes up with a man
from love, the action is natural; but when she resorts to him for the
purpose of getting money, her action is artificial or forced. Even in
the latter case, however, she should conduct herself as if her love were
indeed natural, because men repose their confidence on those women who
apparently love them. In making known her love to the man she should
show an entire freedom from avarice, and for the sake of her future
credit she should abstain from acquiring money from him by unlawful
means.

A courtesan, well dressed and wearing her ornaments, should sit or stand
at the door of her house, and without exposing herself too much, should
look on the public road so as to be seen by the passers by, she being
like an object on view for sale.[74] She should form friendships with
such persons as would enable her to separate men from other women, and
attach them to herself, and repair her own misfortunes, to acquire
wealth, and to protect her from being bullied, or set upon by persons
with whom she may have dealings of some kind or another.

These persons are:

The guards of the town, or the police.

The officers of the courts of justice.

Astrologers.

Powerful men, or men with interest.

Learned men.

Teachers of the sixty-four arts.

Pithamardas or confidants.

Vitas or parasites.

Vidushakas or jesters.

Flower sellers.

Perfumers.

Vendors of spirits.

Washermen.

Barbers.

Beggars.

And such other persons as may be found necessary for the particular
object to be acquired.

The following kinds of men may be taken up with simply for the purpose
of getting their money.

Men of independent income.

Young men.

Men who are free from any ties.

Men who hold places of authority under the King.

Men who have secured their means of livelihood without difficulty.

Men possessed of unfailing sources of income.

Men who consider themselves handsome.

Men who are always praising themselves.

One who is an eunuch, but wishes to be thought a man.

One who hates his equals.

One who is naturally liberal.

One who has influence with the King or his ministers.

One who is always fortunate.

One who is proud of his wealth.

One who disobeys the orders of his elders.

One upon whom the members of his caste keep an eye.

The only son whose father is wealthy.

An ascetic who is internally troubled with desire.

A brave man.

A physician of the King.

Previous acquaintance.

On the other hand, those who are possessed of excellent qualities are to
be resorted to for the sake of love, and fame. Such men are as follows:

Men of high birth, learned, with a good knowledge of the world, and
doing the proper things at the proper times, poets, good story tellers,
eloquent men, energetic men, skilled in various arts, far-seeing into
the future, possessed of great minds, full of perseverance, of a firm
devotion, free from anger, liberal, affectionate to their parents, and
with a liking for all social gatherings, skilled in completing verses
begun by others and in various other sports, free from all disease,
possessed of a perfect body, strong, and not addicted to drinking,
powerful in sexual enjoyment, sociable, showing love towards women and
attracting their hearts to himself, but not entirely devoted to them,
possessed of independent means of livelihood, free from envy, and last
of all free from suspicion.

Such are the good qualities of a man.

The woman also should have the following characteristics, viz.:

She should be possessed of beauty, and amiability, with auspicious body
marks. She should have a liking for good qualities in other people, as
also a liking for wealth. She should take delight in sexual unions
resulting from love, and should be of a firm mind, and of the same class
as the man with regard to sexual enjoyment.

She should always be anxious to acquire and obtain experience and
knowledge, be free from avarice, and always have a liking for social
gatherings, and for the arts.

The following are the ordinary qualities of all women, viz.:

To be possessed of intelligence, good disposition, and good manners; to
be straightforward in behaviour, and to be grateful; to consider well
the future before doing anything; to possess activity, to be of
consistent behaviour, and to have a knowledge of the proper times and
places for doing things; to speak always without meanness, loud
laughter, malignity, anger, avarice, dullness, or stupidity, to have a
knowledge of the Kama Sutra, and to be skilled in all the arts connected
with it.

The faults of the women are to be known by the absence of any of the
above mentioned good qualities.

The following kinds of men are not fit to be resorted to by courtesans,
viz.:

One who is consumptive; one who is sickly; one whose mouth contains
worms; one whose breath smells like human excrement; one whose wife is
dear to him; one who speaks harshly; one who is always suspicious; one
who is avaricious; one who is pitiless; one who is a thief; one who is
self-conceited; one who has a liking for sorcery; one who does not care
for respect or disrespect; one who can be gained over even by his
enemies by means of money; and lastly, one who is extremely bashful.

Ancient authors are of opinion that the causes of a courtesan resorting
to men are love, fear, money, pleasure, returning some act of enmity,
curiosity, sorrow, constant intercourse, Dharma, celebrity, compassion,
the desire of having a friend, shame, the likeness of the man to some
beloved person, the search after good fortune, the getting rid of the
love of somebody else, the being of the same class as the man with
respect to sexual union, living in the same place, constancy, and
poverty. But Vatsyayana decides that desire of wealth, freedom from
misfortune, and love, are the only causes that affect the union of
courtesans with men.

Now a courtesan should not sacrifice money to her love, because money is
the chief thing to be attended to. But in cases of fear, etc., she
should pay regard to strength and other qualities. Moreover, even though
she be invited by any man to join him, she should not at once consent to
an union, because men are apt to despise things which are easily
acquired. On such occasions she should first send the shampooers, and
the singers, and the jesters, who may be in her service, or, in their
absence the Pithamardas, or confidants, and others, to find out the
state of his feelings, and the condition of his mind. By means of these
persons she should ascertain whether the man is pure or impure,
affected, or the reverse, capable of attachment, or indifferent, liberal
or niggardly; and if she finds him to her liking, she should then
employ the Vita and others to attach his mind to her.

Accordingly, the Pithamarda should bring the man to her house, under the
pretence of seeing the fights of quails, cocks, and rams, of hearing the
maina (a kind of starling) talk, or of seeing some other spectacle, or
the practice of some art; or he may take the woman to the abode of the
man. After this, when the man comes to her house the woman should give
him something capable of producing curiosity, and love in his heart,
such as an affectionate present, telling him that it was specially
designed for his use. She should also amuse him for a long time by
telling him such stories, and doing such things as he may take most
delight in. When he goes away she should frequently send to him a female
attendant, skilled in carrying on a jesting conversation, and also a
small present at the same time. She should also sometimes go to him
herself under the pretence of some business, and accompanied by the
Pithamarda.

Thus end the means of attaching to herself the man desired.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows:

"When a lover comes to her abode, a courtesan should give him a mixture
of betel leaves and betel nut, garlands of flowers, and perfumed
ointments, and, showing her skill in arts, should entertain him with a
long conversation. She should also give him some loving presents, and
make an exchange of her own things with his, and at the same time should
show him her skill in sexual enjoyment. When a courtesan is thus united
with her lover she should always delight him by affectionate gifts, by
conversation, and by the application of tender means of enjoyment."

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 74: In England the lower classes of courtesans walk the
streets; in India and other places in the East they sit at the windows,
or at the doors of their houses.]




CHAPTER II.

OF LIVING LIKE A WIFE.


When a courtesan is living as a wife with her lover, she should behave
like a chaste woman, and do everything to his satisfaction. Her duty in
this respect, in short, is, that she should give him pleasure, but
should not become attached to him, though behaving as if she were really
attached.

Now the following is the manner in which she is to conduct herself, so
as to accomplish the above mentioned purpose. She should have a mother
dependent on her, one who should be represented as very harsh, and who
looked upon money as her chief object in life. In the event of there
being no mother, then an old and confidential nurse should play the same
role. The mother or nurse, on their part, should appear to be displeased
with the lover, and forcibly take her away from him. The woman herself
should always show pretended anger, dejection, fear, and shame on this
account, but should not disobey the mother or nurse at any time.

She should make out to the mother or nurse that the man is suffering
from bad health, and making this a pretext for going to see him, she
should go on that account. She is, moreover, to do the following things
for the purpose of gaining the man's favour, viz.:

Sending her female attendant to bring the flowers used by him on the
previous day, in order that she may use them herself as a mark of
affection, also asking for the mixture of betel nut and leaves that have
remained uneaten by him; expressing wonder at his knowledge of sexual
intercourse, and the several means of enjoyment used by him; learning
from him the sixty-four kinds of pleasure mentioned by Babhravya;
continually practising the ways of enjoyment as taught by him, and
according to his liking; keeping his secrets; telling him her own
desires and secrets; concealing her anger; never neglecting him on the
bed when he turns his face towards her; touching any parts of his body
according to his wish; kissing and embracing him when he is asleep;
looking at him with apparent anxiety when he is wrapt in thought, or
thinking of some other subject than herself; showing neither complete
shamelessness, nor excessive bashfulness when he meets her, or sees her
standing on the terrace of her house from the public road; hating his
enemies; loving those who are dear to him; showing a liking for that
which he likes; being in high or low spirits according to the state that
he is in himself; expressing a curiosity to see his wives; not
continuing her anger for a long time; suspecting even the marks and
wounds made by herself with her nails and teeth on his body to have been
made by some other woman; keeping her love for him unexpressed by words,
but showing it by deeds, and signs, and hints; remaining silent when he
is asleep, intoxicated, or sick; being very attentive when he describes
his good actions, and reciting them afterwards to his praise and
benefit; giving witty replies to him if he be sufficiently attached to
her; listening to all his stories, except those that relate to her
rivals; expressing feelings of dejection and sorrow if he sighs, yawns,
or falls down; pronouncing the words "live long" when he sneezes;
pretending to be ill, or to have the desire of pregnancy, when she feels
dejected; abstaining from praising the good qualities of any body else,
and from censuring those who possess the same faults as her own man:
wearing anything that may have been given to her by him; abstaining from
putting on her ornaments, and from taking food when he is in pain, sick,
low-spirited, or suffering from misfortune, and condoling and lamenting
with him over the same; wishing to accompany him if he happens to leave
the country himself or if he be banished from it by the King; expressing
a desire not to live after him; telling him that the whole object and
desire of her life was to be united with him; offering previously
promised sacrifices to the Deity when he acquires wealth, or has some
desire fulfilled, or when he has recovered from some illness or disease;
putting on ornaments every day; not acting too freely with him; reciting
his name and the name of his family in her songs; placing his hand on
her loins, bosom and forehead, and falling asleep after feeling the
pleasure of his touch; sitting on his lap and falling asleep there;
wishing to have a child by him; desiring not to live longer than he
does; abstaining from revealing his secrets to others; dissuading him
from vows and fasts by saying "let the sin fall upon me;" keeping vows
and fasts along with him when it is impossible to change his mind on the
subject; telling him that vows and fasts are difficult to be observed,
even by herself, when she has any dispute with him about them; looking
on her own wealth and his without any distinction; abstaining from going
to public assemblies without him, and accompanying him when he desires
her to do so; taking delight in using things previously used by him, and
in eating food that he has left uneaten; venerating his family, his
disposition, his skill in the arts, his learning, his caste, his
complexion, his native country, his friends, his good qualities, his
age, and his sweet temper; asking him to sing, and to do other such like
things, if able to do them; going to him without paying any regard to
fear, to cold, to heat, or to rain; saying with regard to the next world
that he should be her lover even there; adapting her tastes, disposition
and actions to his liking; abstaining from sorcery; disputing
continually with her mother on the subject of going to him, and, when
forcibly taken by her mother to some other place, expressing her desire
to die by taking poison, by starving herself to death, by stabbing
herself with some weapon, or by hanging herself; and lastly assuring the
man of her constancy and love by means of her agents, and receiving
money herself, but abstaining from any dispute with her mother with
regard to pecuniary matters.

When the man sets out on a journey, she should make him swear that he
will return quickly, and in his absence should put aside her vows of
worshipping the Deity, and should wear no ornaments except those that
are lucky. If the time fixed for his return has passed, she should
endeavour to ascertain the real time of his return from omens, from the
reports of the people, and from the positions of the planets, the moon
and the stars. On occasions of amusement, and of auspicious dreams, she
should say "Let me be soon united to him." If, moreover, she feels
melancholy, or sees any inauspicious omen, she should perform some rite
to appease the Deity.

When the man does return home she should worship the God Kama (_i.e._,
the Indian Cupid), and offer oblations to other Deities, and having
caused a pot filled with water to be brought by her friends, she should
perform the worship in honour of the crow who eats the offerings which
we make to the manes of deceased relations. After the first visit is
over she should ask her lover also to perform certain rites, and this he
will do if he is sufficiently attached to her.

Now a man is said to be sufficiently attached to a woman when his love
is disinterested; when he has the same object in view as his beloved
one; when he is quite free from any suspicions on her account; and when
he is indifferent to money with regard to her.

Such is the manner of a courtesan living with a man like a wife, and set
forth here for the sake of guidance from the rules of Dattaka. What is
not laid down here should be practised according to the custom of the
people, and the nature of each individual man.

There are also two verses on the subject as follows:

"The extent of the love of women is not known, even to those who are the
objects of their affection, on account of its subtlety, and on account
of the avarice, and natural intelligence of womankind."

"Women are hardly ever known in their true light, though they may love
men, or become indifferent towards them; may give them delight, or
abandon them; or may extract from them all the wealth that they may
possess."




CHAPTER III.

OF THE MEANS OF GETTING MONEY. OF THE SIGNS OF THE CHANGE OF A LOVER'S
FEELINGS, AND OF THE WAY TO GET RID OF HIM.


Money is got out of a lover in two ways, viz.:

By natural or lawful means, and by artifices. Old authors are of opinion
that when a courtesan can get as much money as she wants from her lover,
she should not make use of artifice. But Vatsyayana lays down that
though she may get some money from him by natural means, yet when she
makes use of artifice he gives her doubly more, and therefore artifice
should be resorted to for the purpose of extorting money from him at all
events.

Now the artifices to be used for getting money from her lover are as
follows:

1st. Taking money from him on different occasions, for the purpose of
purchasing various articles, such as ornaments, food, drink, flowers,
perfumes and cloths, and either not buying them, or getting from him
more than their cost.

2nd. Praising his intelligence to his face.

3rd. Pretending to be obliged to make gifts on occasion of festivals
connected with vows, trees, gardens, temples, or tanks.[75]

4th. Pretending that at the time of going to his house, her jewels have
been stolen either by the King's guards, or by robbers.

5th. Alleging that her property has been destroyed by fire, by the
falling of her house, or by the carelessness of her servants.

6th. Pretending to have lost the ornaments of her lover along with her
own.

7th. Causing him to hear through other people of the expenses incurred
by her in coming to see him.

8th. Contracting debts for the sake of her lover.

9th. Disputing with her mother on account of some expense incurred by
her for her lover, and which was not approved of by her mother.

10th. Not going to parties and festivities in the houses of her friends
for the want of presents to make to them, she having previously informed
her lover of the valuable presents given to her by these very friends.

11th. Not performing certain festive rites under the pretence that she
has no money to perform them with.

12th. Engaging artists to do something for her lover.

13th. Entertaining physicians and ministers for the purpose of attaining
some object.

14th. Assisting friends and benefactors both on festive occasions, and
in misfortune.

15th. Performing household rites.

16th. Having to pay the expenses of the ceremony of marriage of the son
of a female friend.

17th. Having to satisfy curious wishes during her state of pregnancy.

18th. Pretending to be ill, and charging her cost of treatment.

19th. Having to remove the troubles of a friend.

20th. Selling some of her ornaments, so as to give her lover a present.

21st. Pretending to sell some of her ornaments, furniture, or cooking
utensils to a trader, who has been already tutored how to behave in the
matter.

22nd. Having to buy cooking utensils of greater value than those of
other people, so that they might be more easily distinguished, and not
changed for others of an inferior description.

23rd. Remembering the former favours of her lover, and causing them
always to be spoken of by her friends and followers.

24th. Informing her lover of the great gains of other courtezans.

25th. Describing before them, and in the presence of her lover, her own
great gains, and making them out to be greater even than theirs, though
such may not have been really the case.

26th. Openly opposing her mother when she endeavours to persuade her to
take up with men with whom she has been formerly acquainted, on account
of the great gains to be got from them.

27th. Lastly, pointing out to her lover the liberality of his rivals.

Thus end the ways and means of getting money.

       *       *       *       *       *

A woman should always know the state of the mind, of the feelings, and
of the disposition of her lover towards her, from the changes of his
temper, his manner, and the colour of his face.

The behaviour of a waning lover is as follows:

1st. He gives the woman either less than is wanted, or something else
than that which is asked for.

2nd. He keeps her in hopes by promises.

3rd. He pretends to do one thing, and does something else.

4th. He does not fulfil her desires.

5th. He forgets his promises, or does something else than that which he
has promised.

6th. He speaks with his own servants in a mysterious way.

7th. He sleeps in some other house under the pretence of having to do
something for a friend.

8th. Lastly, he speaks in private with the attendants of a woman with
whom he was formerly acquainted.

Now when a courtesan finds that her lover's disposition towards her is
changing, she should get possession of all his best things before he
becomes aware of her intentions, and allow a supposed creditor to take
them away forcibly from her in satisfaction of some pretended debt.
After this, if the lover is rich, and has always behaved well towards
her, she should ever treat him with respect; but if he is poor and
destitute, she should get rid of him as if she had never been acquainted
with him in any way before.

The means of getting rid of a lover are as follows:

1st. Describing the habits and vices of the lover as disagreeable and
censurable, with the sneer of the lip, and the stamp of the foot.

2nd. Speaking on a subject with which he is not acquainted.

3rd. Showing no admiration for his learning, and passing a censure upon
it.

4th. Putting down his pride.

5th. Seeking the company of men who are superior to him in learning and
wisdom.

6th. Showing a disregard for him on all occasions.

7th. Censuring men possessed of the same faults as her lover.

8th. Expressing dissatisfaction at the ways and means of enjoyment used
by him.

9th. Not giving him her mouth to kiss.

10th. Refusing access to her Jaghana, _i.e._, the part of the body
between the navel and the thighs.

11th. Showing a dislike for the wounds made by his nails and teeth.

12th. Not pressing close up against him at the time when he embraces
her.

13th. Keeping her limbs without movement at the time of congress.

14th. Desiring him to employ her when he is fatigued.

15th. Laughing at his attachment to her.

16th. Not responding to his embraces.

17th. Turning away from him when he begins to embrace her.

18th. Pretending to be sleepy.

19th. Going out visiting, or into company, when she perceives his desire
to enjoy her during the day time.

20th. Mis-constructing his words.

21st. Laughing without any joke, or at the time of any joke made by him,
laughing under some pretence.

22nd. Looking with side glances at her own attendants, and clapping her
hands when he says anything.

23rd. Interrupting him in the middle of his stories, and beginning to
tell other stories herself.

24th. Reciting his faults and his vices, and declaring them to be
incurable.

25th. Saying words to her female attendants calculated to cut the heart
of her lover to the quick.

26th. Taking care not to look at him when he comes to her.

27th. Asking him what cannot be granted.

28th. And, after all, finally dismissing him.

There are also two verses on this subject as follows:

"The duty of a courtesan consists in forming connections with suitable
men after due and full consideration, and attaching the person with whom
she is united to herself; in obtaining wealth from the person who is
attached to her, and then dismissing him after she has taken away all
his possessions."

"A courtesan leading in this manner the life of a wife is not troubled
with too many lovers, and yet obtains abundance of wealth."

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 75: On the completion of a vow a festival takes place. Some
trees such as the Peepul and Banyan trees, are invested with sacred
threads like the Brahman's, and on the occasion of this ceremony a
festival is given. In the same way when gardens are made, and tanks or
temples built, then also festivals are observed.]




CHAPTER IV.

ABOUT RE-UNION WITH A FORMER LOVER.


When a courtesan abandons her present lover after all his wealth is
exhausted, she may then consider about her re-union with a former lover.
But she should return to him only if he has acquired fresh wealth, or is
still wealthy, and if he is still attached to her. And if this man be
living at the time with some other women she should consider well before
she acts.

Now such a man can only be in one of the six following conditions, viz.:

1st. He may have left the first woman of his own accord, and may even
have left another woman since then.

2nd. He may have been driven away from both women.

3rd. He may have left the one woman of his own accord, and be living
with another woman.

5th. He may have been driven away from the one woman, and left the other
of his own accord.

6th. He may have been driven away by the one woman, and may be living
with another.

(1). Now if the man has left both women of his own accord, he should not
be resorted to, on account of the fickleness of his mind, and his
indifference to the excellencies of both of them.

(2). As regards the man who may have been driven away from both women,
if he has been driven away from the last one because the woman could get
more money from some other man, then he should be resorted to, for if
attached to the first woman he would give her more money, through vanity
and emulation to spite the other woman. But if he has been driven away
by the woman on account of his poverty, or stinginess, he should not
then be resorted to.

(3). In the case of the man who may have left the one woman of his own
accord, and been driven away by the other, if he agrees to return to the
former and give her plenty of money beforehand, then he should be
resorted to.

(4). In the case of the man who may have left the one woman of his own
accord, and be living with another woman, the former (wishing to take up
with him again) should first ascertain if he left her in the first
instance in the hope of finding some particular excellence in the other
woman, and that not having found any such excellence, he was willing to
come back to her, and to give her much money on account of his conduct,
and on account of his affection still existing for her.

Or, whether, having discovered many faults in the other woman, he would
now see even more excellences in herself than actually exist, and would
be prepared to give her much money for these qualities.

Or, lastly, to consider whether he was a weak man, or a man fond of
enjoying many women, or one who liked a poor woman, or one who never did
anything for the woman that he was with. After maturely considering all
these things, she should resort to him or not, according to
circumstances.

(5). As regards the man who may have been driven away from the one
woman, and left the other of his own accord, the former woman (wishing
to re-unite with him) should first ascertain whether he still has any
affection for her, and would consequently spend much money upon her; or
whether, being attached to her excellent qualities, he did not take
delight in any other women; or whether, being driven away from her
formerly before completely satisfying his sexual desires, he wished to
get back to her, so as to be revenged for the injury done to him; or
whether he wished to create confidence in her mind, and then take back
from her the wealth which she formerly took from him, and finally
destroy her; or, lastly, whether he wished first to separate her from
her present lover, and then to break away from her himself. If, after
considering all these things, she is of opinion that his intentions are
really pure and honest, she can re-unite herself with him. But if his
mind be at all tainted with evil intentions, he should be avoided.

(6). In the case of the man who may have been driven away by one
woman, and be living with another, if the man makes overtures in return
to the first one, the courtesan should consider well before she acts,
and while the other woman is engaged in attracting him to herself, she
should try in her turn (through keeping herself behind the scenes) to
gain him over, on the grounds of any of the following considerations,
viz.:

1st. That he was driven away unjustly and for no proper reason, and now
that he has gone to another woman, every effort must be used to bring
him back to myself.

2nd. That if he were once to converse with me again, he would break away
from the other woman.

3rd. That the pride of my present lover would be put down by means of
the former one.

4th. That he has become wealthy, has secured a higher position, and
holds a place of authority under the King.

5th. That he is separate from his wife.

6th. That he is now independent.

7th. That he lives apart from his father, or brother.

8th. That by making peace with him I shall be able to get hold of a very
rich man, who is now prevented from coming to me by my present lover.

9th. That as he is not respected by his wife, I shall now be able to
separate him from her.

10th. That the friend of this man loves my rival, who hates me
cordially; I shall, therefore, by this means separate the friend from
his mistress.

11th. And lastly, I shall bring discredit upon him by bringing him back
to me, thus showing the fickleness of his mind.

When a courtesan is resolved to take up again with a former lover, her
Pithamurda and other servants should tell him that his former expulsion
from the woman's house was caused by the wickedness of her mother; that
the woman loved him just as much as ever at that time, but could not
help the occurrence on account of her deference to her mother's will;
that she hated the union of her present lover, and disliked him
excessively. In addition to this, they should create confidence in his
mind by speaking to him of her former love for him, and should allude to
the mark of that love that she has ever remembered. This mark of her
love should be connected with some kind of pleasure that may have been
practised by him, such as his way of kissing her, or manner of having
connection with her.

Thus end the ways of bringing about a re-union with a former lover.

When a woman has to choose between two lovers, one of whom was formerly
united with her, while the other is a stranger, the Acharyas (sages) are
of opinion that the first one is preferable, because his disposition and
character being already known by previous careful observation, he can be
easily pleased and satisfied; but Vatsyayana thinks that a former lover,
having already spent a great deal of his wealth, is not able or willing
to give much money again, and is not, therefore, to be relied upon so
much as a stranger. Particular cases may, however, arise differing from
this general rule on account of the different natures of men.

There are also verses on the subject as follows:

"Re-union with a former lover may be desirable so as to separate some
particular woman from some particular man, or some particular man from
some particular woman, or to have a certain effect upon the present
lover."

"When a man is excessively attached to a woman, he is afraid of her
coming into contact with other men; he does not then regard or notice
her faults; and he gives her much wealth through fear of her leaving
him."

"A courtesan should be agreeable to the man who is attached to her, and
despise the man who does not care for her. If while she is living with
one man a messenger comes to her from some other man, she may either
refuse to listen to any negotiations on his part, or appoint a fixed
time for him to visit her, but she should not leave the man who may be
living with her and who may be attached to her."

"A wise woman should only renew her connection with a former lover if
she is satisfied that good fortune, gain, love, and friendship, are
likely to be the result of such a re-union."




CHAPTER V.

OF DIFFERENT KINDS OF GAIN.


When a courtesan is able to realize much money every day, by reason of
many customers, she should not confine herself to a single lover; under
such circumstances, she should fix her rate for one night, after
considering the place, the season, and the condition of the people, and
having regard to her own good qualities and good looks, and after
comparing her rates with those of other courtesans. She can inform her
lovers, and friends, and acquaintances about these charges. If, however,
she can obtain a great gain from a single lover, she may resort to him
alone, and live with him like a wife.

Now, the Sages are of opinion that when a courtesan has the chance of an
equal gain from two lovers at the same time, a preference should be
given to the one who would give her the kind of thing which she wants.
But Vatsyayana says that the preference should be given to the one who
gives her gold, because it cannot be taken back like some other things,
it can be easily received, and is also the means of procuring anything
that may be wished for. Of such things as gold, silver, copper, bell
metal, iron, pots, furniture, beds, upper garments, under vestments,
fragrant substances, vessels made of gourds, ghee, oil, corn, cattle,
and other things of a like nature, the first, viz., gold, is superior to
all the others.

When the same labour is required to gain any two lovers, or when the
same kind of thing is to be got from each of them, the choice should be
made by the advice of a friend, or it may be made from their personal
qualities, or from the signs of good or bad fortune that may be
connected with them.

When there are two lovers, one of whom is attached to the courtesan, and
the other is simply very generous, the Sages say that the preference
should be given to the generous lover, but Vatsyayana is of opinion that
the one who is really attached to the courtesan should be preferred,
because he can be made to be generous, even as a miser gives money if he
becomes fond of a woman, but a man who is simply generous cannot be made
to love with real attachment. But among those who are attached to her,
if there is one who is poor, and one who is rich, the preference is of
course to be given to the latter.

When there are two lovers, one of whom is generous, and the other ready
to do any service for the courtesan, some Sages say that the one who is
ready to do the service should be preferred, but Vatsyayana is of
opinion that a man who does a service thinks that he has gained his
object when he has done something once, but a generous man does not care
for what he has given before. Even here the choice should be guided by
the likelihood of the future good to be derived from her union with
either of them.

When one of the two lovers is grateful, and the other liberal, some
Sages say that the liberal one should be preferred, but Vatsyayana is of
opinion that the former should be chosen, because liberal men are
generally haughty, plain spoken, and wanting in consideration towards
others. Even though these liberal men have been on friendly terms for a
long time, yet if they see any fault in the courtesan, or are told lies
about her by some other women, they do not care for past services, but
leave abruptly. On the other hand the grateful man does not at once
break off from her, on account of a regard for the pains she may have
taken to please him. In this case also the choice is to be guided with
respect to what may happen in future.

When an occasion for complying with the request of a friend, and a
chance of getting money come together, the Sages say that the chance of
getting money should be preferred. But Vatsyayana thinks that the money
can be obtained to-morrow as well as to-day, but if the request of a
friend be not at once complied with, he may become disaffected. Even
here, in making the choice, regard must be paid to future good fortune.

On such an occasion, however, the courtesan might pacify her friend by
pretending to have some work to do, and telling him that his request
will be complied with next day, and in this way secure the chance of
getting the money that has been offered her.

When the chance of getting money, and the chance of avoiding some
disaster come at the same time, the Sages are of opinion that the chance
of getting money should be preferred, but Vatsyayana says that money has
only a limited importance, while a disaster that is once averted may
never occur again. Here, however, the choice should be guided by the
greatness or smallness of the disaster.

The gains of the wealthiest and best kind of courtesans are to be spent
as follows:

Building temples, tanks, and gardens; giving a thousand cows to
different Brahmans; carrying on the worship of the Gods, and celebrating
festivals in their honour; and, lastly, performing such vows as may be
within their means.

The gains of other courtesans are to be spent as follows:

Having a white dress to wear every day; getting sufficient food and
drink to satisfy hunger and thirst; eating daily a perfumed Tambula,
_i.e._, a mixture of betel nut and betel leaves; and wearing ornaments
gilt with gold. The Sages say that these represent the gains of all the
middle and lower classes of courtesans, but Vatsyayana is of opinion
that their gains cannot be calculated, or fixed in any way, as these
depend on the influence of the place, the customs of the people, their
own appearance, and many other things.

When a courtesan wants to keep some particular man from some other
woman; or wants to get him away from some woman to whom he may be
attached; or to deprive some woman of the gains realized by her from
him; or if she thinks that she would raise her position; or enjoy some
great good fortune; or become desirable to all men by uniting herself
with this man; or if she wishes to get his assistance in averting some
misfortune; or is really attached to him and loves him; or wishes to
injure somebody through his means; or has regard to some former favour
conferred upon her by him; or wishes to be united with him merely from
desire; or any of the above reasons, she should agree to take from him
only a small sum of money in a friendly way.

When a courtesan intends to abandon a particular lover, and take up with
another one; or when she has reason to believe that her lover will
shortly leave her, and return to his wives; or that having squandered
all his money, and became penniless, his guardian, or master, or father
would come and take him away; or that her lover is about to lose his
position, or lastly, that he is of a very fickle mind, she should, under
any of these circumstances, endeavour to get as much money as she can
from him as soon as possible.

On the other hand, when the courtesan thinks that her lover is about to
receive valuable presents; or get a place of authority from the King; or
be near the time of inheriting a fortune; or that his ship would soon
arrive laden with merchandise; or that he has large stocks of corn and
other commodities; or that if anything was done for him it would not be
done in vain; or that he is always true to his word; then should she
have regard to her future welfare, and live with the man like a wife.

There are also verses on the subject as follows:

"In considering her present gains, and her future welfare, a courtesan
should avoid such persons as have gained their means of subsistence with
very great difficulty, as also those who have become selfish and
hard-hearted by becoming the favourites of Kings."

"She should make every endeavour to unite herself with prosperous and
well-to-do people, and with those whom it is dangerous to avoid, or to
slight in any way. Even at some cost to herself she should become
acquainted with energetic and liberal-minded men, who when pleased would
give her a large sum of money, even for very little service, or for some
small thing."




CHAPTER VI.

OF GAINS AND LOSSES; ATTENDANT GAINS AND LOSSES; AND DOUBTS; AS ALSO OF
THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF COURTESANS.


It sometimes happens that while gains are being sought for, or expected
to be realised, that losses only are the result of our efforts, the
causes of these losses are:

Weakness of intellect.

Excessive love.

Excessive pride.

Excessive self conceit.

Excessive simplicity.

Excessive confidence.

Excessive anger.

Carelessness.

Recklessness.

Influence of evil genius.

Accidental circumstances.

The results of these losses are:

Expense incurred without any result.

Destruction of future good fortune.

Stoppage of gains about to be realized.

Loss of what is already obtained.

Acquisition of a sour temper.

Becoming unaimiable to every body.

Injury to health.

Loss of hair and other accidents.

Now gain is of three kinds, viz.: gain of wealth, gain of religious
merit, and gain of pleasure; and similarly, loss is of three kinds,
viz.: loss of wealth, loss of religious merit, and loss of pleasure. At
the time when gains are sought for, if other gains come along with them,
these are called attendant gains. When gain is uncertain, the doubt of
its being a gain is called a simple doubt. When there is a doubt
whether either of two things will happen or not, it is called a mixed
doubt. If while one thing is being done two results take place, it is
called a combination of two results, and if several results follow from
the same action, it is called a combination of results on every side.

We shall now give examples of the above.

As already stated, gain is of three kinds, and loss, which is opposed to
gain, is also of three kinds.

(a). When by living with a great man a courtesan acquires present
wealth, and in addition to this becomes acquainted with other people,
and thus obtains a chance of future fortune, and an accession of wealth,
and becomes desirable to all, this is called a gain of wealth attended
by other gain.

(b). When by living with a man a courtesan simply gets money, this is
called a gain of wealth not attended by any other gain.

(c). When a courtesan receives money from other people besides her
lover, the results are: the chance of the loss of future good from her
present lover; the chance of disaffection of a man securely attached to
her; the hatred of all; and the chance of a union with some low person,
tending to destroy her future good. This gain is called a gain of wealth
attended by losses.

(d). When a courtesan, at her own expense, and without any results in
the shape of gain, has connected with a great man, or an avaricious
minister, for the sake of diverting some misfortune, or removing some
cause that may be threatening the destruction of a great gain, this loss
is said to be a loss of wealth attended by gains of the future good
which it may bring about.

(e). When a courtesan is kind, even at her own expense, to a man who is
very stingy, or to a man proud of his looks, or to an ungrateful man
skilled in gaining the heart of others, without any good resulting from
these connections to her in the end, this loss is called a loss of
wealth not attended by any gain.

(f). When a courtesan is kind to any such man as described above, but
who in addition are favourites of the King, and moreover cruel and
powerful, without any good result in the end, and with a chance of her
being turned away at any moment, this loss is called a loss of wealth
attended by other losses.

In this way gains and losses, and attendant gains and losses in
religious merit and pleasures may become known to the reader, and
combinations of all of them may also be made.

Thus end the remarks on gains and losses, and attendant gains and
losses.

In the next place we come to doubts, which are again of three kinds,
viz.: doubts about wealth, doubts about religious merit, and doubts
about pleasures.

The following are examples.

(a). When a courtesan is not certain how much a man may give her, or
spend upon her, this is called a doubt about wealth.

(b). When a courtesan feels doubtful whether she is right in entirely
abandoning a lover from whom she is unable to get money, she having
taken all his wealth from him in the first instance, this doubt is
called a doubt about religious merit.

(c). When a courtesan is unable to get hold of a lover to her liking,
and is uncertain whether she will derive any pleasure from a person
surrounded by his family, or from a low person, this is called a doubt
about pleasure.

(d). When a courtesan is uncertain whether some powerful but low
principled fellow would cause loss to her on account of her not being
civil to him, this is called a doubt about the loss of wealth.

(e). When a courtesan feels doubtful whether she would lose religious
merit by abandoning a man who is attached to her without giving him the
slightest favour, and thereby causing him unhappiness in this world and
the next,[76] this doubt is called a doubt about the loss of a religious
merit.

(f). When a courtesan is uncertain as to whether she might create
disaffection by speaking out, and revealing her love and thus not get
her desire satisfied, this is called a doubt about the loss of pleasure.

Thus end the remarks on doubts.


_Mixed Doubts_.

(a). The intercourse or connection with a stranger, whose disposition is
unknown, and who may have been introduced by a lover, or by one who
possessed authority, may be productive either of gain or loss, and
therefore this is called a mixed doubt about the gain and loss of
wealth.

(b). When a courtesan is requested by a friend, or is impelled by pity
to have intercourse with a learned Brahman, a religious student, a
sacrificer, a devotee, or an ascetic who may have all fallen in love
with her, and who may be consequently at the point of death, by doing
this she might either gain or lose religious merit, and therefore this
is called a mixed doubt about the gain and loss of religious merit.

(c). If a courtesan relies solely upon the report of other people (_i.e._,
hearsay) about a man, and goes to him without ascertaining herself
whether he possesses good qualities or not, she may either gain or lose
pleasure in proportion as he may be good or bad, and therefore this is
called a mixed doubt about the gain and loss of pleasure.

Uddalika has described the gains and losses on both sides as follows.

(a). If, when living with a lover, a courtesan gets both wealth and
pleasure from him, it is called a gain on both sides.

(b). When a courtesan lives with a lover at her own expense without
getting any profit out of it, and the lover even takes back from her
what he may have formerly given her, it is called a loss on both sides.

(c). When a courtesan is uncertain whether a new acquaintance would
become attached to her, and, moreover, if he became attached to her,
whether he would give her any thing, it is then called a doubt on both
sides about gains.

(d). When a courtesan is uncertain whether a former enemy, if made up by
her at her own expense, would do her some injury on account of his
grudge against her; or, if becoming attached to her, would take away
angrily from her any thing that he may have given to her, this is called
a doubt on both sides about loss.

Babhravya has described the gains and losses on both sides as follows.

(a). When a courtesan can get money from a man whom she may go to see,
and also money from a man whom she may not go to see, this is called a
gain on both sides.

(b). When a courtesan has to incur further expense if she goes to see a
man, and yet runs the risk of incurring an irremediable loss if she does
not go to see him, this is called a loss on both sides.

(c). When a courtesan is uncertain, whether a particular man would give
her anything on her going to see him, without incurring expense on her
part, or whether on her neglecting him another man would give her
something, this is called a doubt on both sides about gain.

(d.) When a courtesan is uncertain, whether, on going at her own expense
to see an old enemy, he would take back from her what he may have given
her, or whether by her not going to see him he would cause some disaster
to fall upon her, this is called a doubt on both sides about loss.

By combining the above, the following six kinds of mixed results are
produced, viz.:

(a). Gain on one side, and loss on the other.

(b). Gain on one side, and doubt of gain on the other.

(c). Gain on one side, and doubt of loss on the other.

(d). Loss on one side, and doubt of gain on the other.

(e). Doubt of gain on one side, and doubt of loss on the other.

(f). Doubt of loss on one side, and loss on the other.

A courtesan, having considered all the above things, and taken council
with her friends, should act so as to acquire gain, the chances of great
gain, and the warding off of any great disaster. Religious merit and
pleasure should also be formed into separate combinations like those of
wealth, and then all should be combined with each other, so as to form
new combinations.

When a courtesan consorts with men she should cause each of them to give
her money as well as pleasure. At particular times, such as the Spring
Festivals, etc., she should make her mother announce to the various men,
that on a certain day her daughter would remain with the man who would
gratify such and such a desire of hers.

When young men approach her with delight, she should think of what she
may accomplish through them.

The combination of gains and losses on all sides are: gain on one side,
and loss on all others; loss on one side and gain on all others; gain on
all sides, loss on all sides.

A courtesan should also consider doubts about gain and doubts about loss
with reference both to wealth, religious merit, and pleasure.

Thus ends the consideration of gain, loss, attendant gains, attendant
losses, and doubts.

The different kinds of courtesans are:

A bawd.

A female attendant.

An unchaste woman.

A dancing girl.

A female artisan.

A woman who has left her family.

A woman living on her beauty.

And, finally, a regular courtesan.

All the above kinds of courtesans are acquainted with various kinds of
men, and should consider the ways of getting money from them, of
pleasing them, of separating themselves from them, and of re-uniting
with them. They should also take into consideration particular gains and
losses, attendant gains and losses, and doubts in accordance with their
several conditions.

Thus end the considerations of courtesans.

There are also two verses on the subject as follows:

"Men want pleasure, while women want money, and therefore this Part,
which treats of the means of gaining wealth, should be studied."

"There are some women who seek for love, and there are others who seek
for money; for the former the ways of love are told in previous portions
of this work, while the ways of getting money, as practised by
courtesans, are described in this Part."

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 76: The souls of men who die with their desires unfulfilled
are said to go to the world of the Manes, and not direct to the Supreme
Spirit.]

=END OF PART VI.=




PART VII.

ABOUT THE MEANS OF ATTRACTING OTHERS TO YOURSELF.




CHAPTER I.

ON PERSONAL ADORNMENT; ON SUBJUGATING THE HEARTS OF OTHERS; AND ON TONIC
MEDICINES.


When a person fails to obtain the object of his desires by any of the
ways previously related, he should then have recourse to other ways of
attracting others to himself.

Now, good looks, good qualities, youth, and liberality are the chief and
most natural means of making a person agreeable in the eyes of others.
But in the absence of these a man or a woman must have resort to
artificial means, or to art, and the following are some recipes that may
be found useful.

(a). An ointment made of the tabernamontana coronaria, the costus
speciosus or arabicus, and the flacourtia cataphracta, can be used as an
unguent of adornment.

(b). If a fine powder is made of the above plants, and applied to the
wick of a lamp, which is made to burn with the oil of blue vitrol, the
black pigment or lamp black produced therefrom, when applied to the
eye-lashes, has the effect of making a person look lovely.

(c). The oil of the hog weed, the echites putescens, the sarina plant,
the yellow amaranth, and the leaf of the nymph√¶, if applied to the body,
has the same effect.

(d). A black pigment from the same plants produce a similar effect.

(e). By eating the powder of the nelumbrium speciosum, the blue lotus,
and the mesna roxburghii, with ghee and honey, a man becomes lovely in
the eyes of others.

(f). The above things, together with the tabernamontana coronaria, and
the xanthochymus pictorius, if used as an ointment, produce the same
results.

(g). If the bone of a peacock or of an hyena be covered with gold, and
tied on the right hand, it makes a man lovely in the eyes of other
people.

(h). In the same way, if a bead, made of the seed of the jujube, or of
the conch shell, be enchanted by the incantations mentioned in the
Atharvana Veda, or by the incantations of those well skilled in the
science of magic, and tied on the hand, it produces the same result as
described above.

(i). When a female attendant arrives at the age of puberty, her master
should keep her secluded, and when men ardently desire her on account of
her seclusion, and on account of the difficulty of approaching her, he
should then bestow her hand on such a person as may endow her with
wealth and happiness.

This is a means of increasing the loveliness of a person in the eyes of
others.

In the same way, when the daughter of a courtesan arrives at the age of
puberty, the mother should get together a lot of young men of the same
age, disposition, and knowledge as her daughter, and tell them that she
would give her in marriage to the person who would give her presents of
a particular kind.

After this the daughter should be kept in seclusion as far as possible,
and the mother should give her in marriage to the man who may be ready
to give her the presents agreed upon. If the mother is unable to get so
much out of the man, she should show some of her own things as having
been given to the daughter by the bridegroom.

Or, the mother may allow her daughter to be married to the man
privately, as if she was ignorant of the whole affair, and then
pretending that it has come to her knowledge, she may give her consent
to the union.

The daughter, too, should make herself attractive to the sons of wealthy
citizens, unknown to her mother, and make them attached to her, and for
this purpose should meet them at the time of learning to sing, and in
places where music is played, and at the houses of other people, and
then request her mother, through a female friend, or servant, to be
allowed to unite herself to the man who is most agreeable to her.[77]

When the daughter of a courtesan is thus given to a man, the ties of
marriage should be observed for one year, and after that she may do what
she likes. But even after the end of the year, when otherwise engaged,
if she should be now and then invited by her first husband to come and
see him, she should put aside her present gain, and go to him for the
night.

Such is the mode of temporary marriage among courtesans, and of
increasing their loveliness, and their value in the eyes of others. What
has been said about them should also be understood to apply to the
daughters of dancing women, whose mothers should give them only to such
persons as are likely to become useful to them in various ways.

Thus end the ways of making oneself lovely in the eyes of others.

(a). If a man, after anointing his lingam with a mixture of the powders
of the white thorn apple, the long pepper, and the black pepper, and
honey, engages in sexual union with a woman, he makes her subject to his
will.

(b). The application of a mixture of the leaf of the plant vatodbhranta,
of the flowers thrown on a human corpse when carried out to be burnt,
and the powder of the bones of the peacock, and of the jiwanjiva bird,
produces the same effect.

(c). The remains of a kite who has died a natural death, ground into
powder, and mixed with cowach and honey, has also the same effect.

(d). Anointing oneself with an ointment made of the plant emblica
myrabolans has the power of subjecting women to one's will.

(e). If a man cuts into small pieces the sprouts of the vajnasunhi
plant, and dips them into a mixture of red arsenic and sulphur, and then
dries them seven times, and applies this powder mixed with honey to his
lingam, he can subjugate a woman to his will directly that he has had
sexual union with her, or, if, by burning these very sprouts at night
and looking at the smoke, he sees a golden moon behind, he will then be
successful with any woman; or if he throws some of the powder of these
same sprouts mixed with the excrement of a monkey upon a maiden, she
will not be given in marriage to any body else.

(f). If pieces of the arris root are dressed with the oil of the mango,
and placed for six months in a hole made in the trunk of the sisu tree,
and are then taken out and made up into an ointment, and applied to the
lingam, this is said to serve as the means of subjugating women.

(g). If the bone of a camel is dipped into the juice of the plant
eclipta prostata, and then burnt, and the black pigment produced from
its ashes is placed in a box also made of the bone of a camel, and
applied together with antimony to the eye lashes with a pencil also made
of the bone of a camel, then that pigment is said to be very pure, and
wholesome for the eyes, and serves as a means of subjugating others to
the person who uses it. The same effect can be produced by black pigment
made of the bones of hawks, vultures, and peacocks.

Thus end the ways of subjugating others to one's own will.

Now the means of increasing sexual vigour are as follows:

(a). A man obtains sexual vigour by drinking milk mixed with sugar, the
root of the uchchata plant, the piper chaba, and liquorice.

(b). Drinking milk mixed with sugar, and having the testicle of a ram or
a goat boiled in it, is also productive of vigour.

(c). The drinking of the juice of the hedysarum gangeticum, the kuili,
and the kshirika plant mixed with milk, produces the same effect.

(d). The seed of the long pepper along with the seeds of the sanseviera
roxburghiana, and the hedysarum gangeticum plant, all pounded together,
and mixed with milk, is productive of a similar result.

(e). According to ancient authors, if a man pounds the seeds or roots of
the trapa bispinosa, the kasurika, the tuscan jasmine, and liquorice,
together with the kshirakapoli (a kind of onion), and puts the powder
into milk mixed with sugar and ghee, and having boiled the whole mixture
on a moderate fire, drinks the paste so formed, he will be able to enjoy
innumerable women.

(f). In the same way, if a man mixes rice with the eggs of the sparrow,
and having boiled this in milk, adds to it ghee and honey, and drinks as
much of it as necessary, this will produce the same effect.

(g). If a man takes the outer covering of sesamum seeds, and soaks them
with the eggs of sparrows, and then, having boiled them in milk, mixed
with sugar and ghee, along with the fruits of the trapa bispinosa and
the kasurika plant, and adding to it the flour of wheat and beans, and
then drinks this composition, he is said to be able to enjoy many women.

(h). If ghee, honey, sugar, and liquorice in equal quantities, the juice
of the fennel plant, and milk are mixed together, this nectar-like
composition is said to be holy, and provocative of sexual vigour, a
preservative of life, and sweet to the taste.

(i). The drinking of a paste composed of the asparagus racemosus, the
shvadaushtra plant, the guduchi plant, the long pepper, and liquorice,
boiled in milk, honey, and ghee, in the spring, is said to have the same
effect as the above.

(j). Boiling the asparagus racemosus, and the shvadaushtra plant, along
with the pounded fruits of the premna spinosa in water, and drinking the
same, is said to act in the same way.

(k). Drinking boiled ghee, or clarified butter in the morning during the
spring season, is said to be beneficial to health and strength, and
agreeable to the taste.

(l). If the powder of the seed of the shvadaushtra plant and the flower
of barley are mixed together in equal parts, and a portion of it, _i.e._,
two palas in weight, is eaten every morning on getting up, it has the
same effect as the preceding recipe.

There are also verses on the subject as follows:

"The means[78] of producing love and sexual vigour should be learnt from
the science of medicine, from the Vedas, from those who are learned in
the arts of magic, and from confidential relatives. No means should be
tried which are doubtful in their effects, which are likely to cause
injury to the body, which involve the death of animals, and which bring
us in contact with impure things. Such means should only be used as are
holy, acknowledged to be good, and approved of by Brahmans, and
friends."

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote 77: It is a custom of the courtesans of Oriental countries to
give their daughters temporarily in marriage when they come of age, and
after they have received an education in the Kama Sutra and other arts.
Full details are given of this at page 76 of "Early Ideas, a group of
Hindoo stories, collected and collated by Anaryan. W. H. Allen and Co.,
London, 1881."]

[Footnote 78: From the earliest times Oriental authors have occupied
themselves about aphrodisiacs. The following note on the subject is
taken from page 29 of a translation of the Hindoo Art of Love, otherwise
the Anunga Runga, alluded to in the preface of this work, Part I., pages
3 and 5:--"Most Eastern treatises divide aphrodisiacs into two different
kinds: 1., the mechanical or natural, such as scarification,
flagellation, etc.; and 2., the medicinal or artificial. To the former
belong the application of insects, as is practised by some savage races;
and all orientalists will remember the tale of the old Brahman, whose
young wife insisted upon his being again stung by a wasp."]




CHAPTER II.

OF THE WAYS OF EXCITING DESIRE, AND MISCELLANEOUS EXPERIMENTS, AND
RECIPES.


If a man is unable to satisfy a Hastini, or elephant woman, he should
have recourse to various means to excite her passion. At the
commencement he should rub her yoni with his hand or fingers, and not
begin to have intercourse with her until she becomes excited, or
experiences pleasure. This is one way of exciting a woman.

Or, he may make use of certain Apadravyas, or things which are put on or
around the lingam to supplement its length or its thickness, so as to
fit it to the yoni. In the opinion of Babhravya, these Apadravyas should
be made of gold, silver, copper, iron, ivory, buffalo's horn, various
kinds of wood, tin or lead, and should be soft, cool, provocative of
sexual vigour, and well fitted to serve the intended purpose.
Vatsyayana, however, says that they may be made according to the natural
liking of each individual.

The following are the different kinds of Apadravyas.

(1). "The armlet" (Valaya) should be of the same size as the lingam, and
should have its outer surface made rough with globules.

(2). "The couple" (Sanghati) is formed of two armlets.

(3). "The bracelet" (Chudaka) is made by joining three or more armlets,
until they come up to the required length of the lingam.

(4). "The single bracelet" is formed by wrapping a single wire around
the lingam, according to its dimensions.

(5). The Kantuka or Jalaka is a tube open at both ends, with a hole
through it, outwardly rough and studded with soft globules, and made to
fit the side of the yoni, and tied to the waist.

When such a thing cannot be obtained, then a tube made of the wood
apple, or tubular stalk of the bottle gourd, or a reed made soft with
oil and extracts of plants, and tied to the waist with strings, may be
made use of, as also a row of soft pieces of wood tied together.

The above are the things that can be used in connection with or in the
place of the lingam.

The people of the southern countries think that true sexual pleasure
cannot be obtained without perforating the lingam, and they therefore
cause it to be pierced like the lobes of the ears of an infant pierced
for earrings.

Now, when a young man perforates his lingam he should pierce it with a
sharp instrument, and then stand in water so long as the blood continues
to flow. At night he should engage in sexual intercourse, even with
vigour, so as to clean the hole. After this he should continue to wash
the hole with decoctions, and increase the size by putting into it small
pieces of cane, and the wrightia antidysenterica, and thus gradually
enlarging the orifice. It may also be washed with liquorice mixed with
honey, and the size of the hole increased by the fruit stalks of the
sima-patra plant. The hole should be annointed with a small quantity of
oil.

In the hole made in the lingam a man may put Apadravyas of various
forms, such as the "round," the "round on one side," the "wooden
mortar," the "flower," the "armlet," the "bone of the heron," the "goad
of the elephant," the "collection of eight balls," the "lock of hair,"
the "place where four roads meet," and other things named according to
their forms and means of using them. All these Apadravyas should be
rough on the outside according to their requirements.

The ways of enlarging the lingam must be now related.

When a man wishes to enlarge his lingam, he should rub it with the
bristles of certain insects that live in trees, and then, after rubbing
it for ten nights with oils, he should again rub it with the bristles as
before. By continuing to do this a swelling will be gradually produced
in the lingam, and he should then lie on a cot, and cause his lingam to
hang down through a hole in the cot. After this he should take away all
the pain from the swelling by using cool concoctions. The swelling,
which is called "Suka," and is often brought about among the people of
the Dravida country, lasts for life.

If the lingam is rubbed with the following things, viz., the plant
physalis flexuosa, the shavara-kandaka plant, the jalasuka plant, the
fruit of the egg plant, the butter of a she buffalo, the hastri-charma
plant, and the juice of the vajra-rasa plant, a swelling lasting for one
month will be produced.

By rubbing it with oil boiled in the concoctions of the above things,
the same effect will be produced, but lasting for six months.

The enlargement of the lingam is also effected by rubbing it or
moistening it with oil boiled on a moderate fire along with the seeds of
the pomegranate, and the cucumber, the juices of the valuka plant, the
hasti-charma plant, and the egg-plant.

In addition to the above, other means may be learnt from experienced and
confidential persons.

The miscellaneous experiments and recipes are as follows:

(a). If a man mixes the powder of the milk hedge plant, and the kantaka
plant with the excrement of a monkey, and the powdered root of the
lanjalalika plant, and throws this mixture on a woman, she will not love
any body else afterwards.

(b). If a man thickens the juice of the fruits of the cassia fistula,
and the eugenia jambolana by mixing them with the powder of the soma
plant, the vernonia anthelmintica, the eclipta prostata, and the
lohopa-jihirka, and applies this composition to the yoni of a woman, and
then has sexual intercourse with her, his love for her will be
destroyed.

(c). The same effect is produced if a man has connection with a woman
who has bathed in the butter-milk of a she-buffalo mixed with the
powders of the gopalika plant, the banu-padika plant, and the yellow
amaranth.

(d). An ointment made of the flowers of the nauclea cadamba, the hog
plum, and the eugenia jambolana, and used by a woman, causes her to be
disliked by her husband.

(e). Garlands made of the above flowers, when worn by the woman, produce
the same effect.

(f). An ointment made of the fruit of the asteracantha longifolia
(kokilaksha) will contract the yoni of a Hastini or elephant woman, and
this contraction lasts for one night.

(g). An ointment made by pounding the roots of the nelumbrium speciosum,
and of the blue lotus, and the powder of the plant physalis flexuosa
mixed with ghee and honey, will enlarge the yoni of the Mrigi or deer
woman.

(h). An ointment made of the fruit of the emblica myrabolans soaked in
the milky juice of the milk hedge plant, of the soma plant, the
calotropis gigantea, and the juice of the fruit of the vernonia
anthelmintica, will make the hair white.

(i). The juice of the roots of the madayantaka plant, the yellow
amaranth, the anjanika plant, the clitoria ternateea, and the
shlakshnaparni plant, used as a lotion, will make the hair grow.

(j). An ointment made by boiling the above roots in oil, and rubbed in,
will make the hair black, and will also gradually restore hair that has
fallen off.

(k) If lac is saturated seven times in the sweat of the testicle of a
white horse, and applied to a red lip, the lip will become white.

(l). The colour of the lips can be regained by means of the madayantika
and other plants mentioned above under (i).

(m). A woman who hears a man playing on a reed pipe which has been
dressed with the juices of the bahupadika plant, the tabernamontana
coronaria, the costus speciosus or arabicus, the pinus deodora, the
euphorbia antiquorum, the vajra and the kantaka plant, becomes his
slave.

(n). If food be mixed with the fruit of the thorn apple (Dathura) it
causes intoxication.

(o). If water be mixed with oil and the ashes of any kind of grass
except the kusha grass, it becomes the colour of milk.

(p). If yellow myrabolans, the hog plum, the shrawana plant, and the
priyangu plant be all pounded together, and applied to iron pots, these
pots become red.

(q). If a lamp, trimmed with oil extracted from the shrawana and
priyangn plants, its wick being made of cloth and the slough of the
skins of snakes, is lighted, and long pieces of wood placed near it,
those pieces of wood will resemble so many snakes.

(r). Drinking the milk of a white cow who has a white calf at her feet
is auspicious, produces fame, and preserves life.

(s). The blessings of venerable Brahmans, well propitiated, have the
same effect.

There are also some verses in conclusion:

"Thus have I written in a few words the 'Science of love,' after reading
the texts of ancient authors, and following the ways of enjoyment
mentioned in them."

"He who is acquainted with the true principles of this science pays
regard to Dharma, Artha, Kama, and to his own experiences, as well as to
the teachings of others, and does not act simply on the dictates of his
own desire. As for the errors in the science of love which I have
mentioned in this work, on my own authority as an author, I have,
immediately after mentioning them, carefully censured and prohibited
them."

"An act is never looked upon with indulgence for the simple reason that
it is authorised by the science, because it ought to be remembered that
it is the intention of the science, that the rules which it contains
should only be acted upon in particular cases. After reading and
considering the works of Babhravya and other ancient authors, and
thinking over the meaning of the rules given by them, the Kama Sutra was
composed, according to the precepts of Holy Writ, for the benefit of the
world, by Vatsyayana, while leading the life of a religious student, and
wholly engaged in the contemplation of the Deity."

"This work is not intended to be used merely as an instrument for
satisfying our desires. A person, acquainted with the true principles of
this science, and who preserves his Dharma, Artha, and Kama, and has
regard for the practices of the people, is sure to obtain the mastery
over his senses."

"In short, an intelligent and prudent person, attending to Dharma and
Artha, and attending to Kama also, without becoming the slave of his
passions, obtains success in everything that he may undertake."

=END OF PART VII.=




CONCLUDING REMARKS.


Thus ends, in seven parts, the Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana, which might
otherwise be called a treatise on men and women, their mutual
relationship, and connection with each other.

It is a work that should be studied by all, both old and young; the
former will find in it real truths, gathered by experience, and already
tested by themselves, while the latter will derive the great advantage
of learning things, which some perhaps may otherwise never learn at all,
or which they may only learn when it is too late ("too late" those
immortal words of Mirabeau) to profit by the learning.

It can also be fairly commended to the student of social science and of
humanity, and above all to the student of those early ideas, which have
gradually filtered down through the sands of time, and which seem to
prove that the human nature of to-day is much the same as the human
nature of the long ago.

It has been said of Balzac [the great, if not the greatest of French
novelists] that he seemed to have inherited a natural and intuitive
perception of the feelings of men and women, and has described them with
an analysis worthy of a man of science. The author of the present work
must also have had a considerable knowledge of the humanities. Many of
his remarks are so full of simplicity and truth, that they have stood
the test of time, and stand out still as clear and true as when they
were first written, some eighteen hundred years ago.

As a collection of facts, told in plain and simple language, it must be
remembered that in those early days there was apparently no idea of
embellishing the work, either with a literary style, a flow of
language, or a quantity of superfluous padding. The author tells the
world what he knows in very concise language, without any attempt to
produce an interesting story. From his facts how many novels could be
written! Indeed much of the matter contained in parts III. IV. V. and
VI., has formed the basis of many of the stories and the tales of past
centuries.

There will be found in part VII., some curious recipes. Many of them
appear to be as primitive as the book itself, but in later works of the
same nature these recipes and prescriptions appear to have increased,
both as regards quality and quantity. In the Anunga Runga or "The Stage
of Love," mentioned at page 5 of the Preface in Part I., there are found
no less than thirty-three different subjects for which one hundred and
thirty recipes and prescriptions are given.

As the details may be interesting, these subjects are described as
follows:

1. For hastening the paroxysm of the woman.

2. For delaying the organs of the man.

3. Aphrodisiacs.

4. For thickening and enlarging the lingam, rendering it sound and
strong, hard and lusty.

5. For narrowing and contracting the yoni.

6. For perfuming the yoni.

7. For removing and destroying the hair of the body.

8. For removing the sudden stopping of the monthly ailment.

9. For abating the immoderate appearance of the monthly ailment.

10. For purifying the womb.

11. For causing pregnancy.

12. For preventing miscarriage and other accidents.

13. For ensuring easy labour and ready deliverance.

14. For limiting the number of children.

15. For thickening and beautifying the hair.

16. For obtaining a good black colour to it.

17. For whitening and bleaching it.

18. For renewing it.

19. For clearing the skin of the face from eruptions that break out and
leave black spots upon it.

20. For removing the black colour of the epidermis.

21. For enlarging the breasts of women.

22. For raising and hardening pendulous breasts.

23. For giving a fragrance to the skin.

24. For removing the evil savour of perspiration.

25. For anointing the body after bathing.

26. For causing a pleasant smell to the breath.

27. Drugs and charms for the purposes of fascinating, overcoming, and
subduing either men or women.

28. Recipes for enabling a woman to attract and preserve her husband's
love.

29. Magical collyriums for winning love and friendship.

30. Prescriptions for reducing other persons to submission.

31. Philter pills, and other charms.

32. Fascinating incense, or fumigation.

33. Magical verses which have the power of fascination.

Of the one hundred and thirty recipes given, many of them are absurd,
but not more perhaps than many of the recipes and prescriptions in use
in Europe not so very long ago. Love-philters, charms, and herbal
remedies have been, in early days, as freely used in Europe as in Asia,
and doubtless some people believe in them still in many places.

And now, one word about the author of the work, the good old sage
Vatsyayana. It is much to be regretted that nothing can be discovered
about his life, his belongings, and his surroundings. At the end of Part
VII. he states that he wrote the work while leading the life of a
religious student [probably at Benares] and while wholly engaged in the
contemplation of the Deity. He must have arrived at a certain age at
that time, for throughout he gives us the benefit of his experience, and
of his opinions, and these bear the stamp of age rather than of youth;
indeed the work could hardly have been written by a young man.

In a beautiful verse of the Vedas of the Christians it has been said of
the peaceful dead, that they rest from their labours, and that their
works do follow them. Yes indeed, the works of men of genius do follow
them, and remain as a lasting treasure. And though there may be
disputes and discussions about the immortality of the body or the soul,
nobody can deny the immortality of genius, which ever remains as a
bright and guiding star to the struggling humanities of succeeding ages.
This work, then, which has stood the test of centuries, has placed
Vatsyayana among the immortals, and on This, and on Him no better elegy
or eulogy can be written than the following lines:

   "So long as lips shall kiss, and eyes shall see,
   So long lives This, and This gives life to Thee."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Works issued by the Council of the_ KAMA SHASTRA SOCIETY.


_DETAILED PROSPECTUSES CAN BE HAD._


II.

   ANANGA-RANGA,
   (_Stage of the Bodiless One_)
   OR THE
   HINDOO ART OF LOVE,
   (_Ars Amoris Indica_,)

   TRANSLATED FROM THE SANSKRIT AND ANNOTATED BY
   A. F. F. AND B. F. R.

   [_Ready._

This work may fairly be pronounced unique from the days of Sotades and
Ovid to our time. Western authors have treated the subject either
jocularly, or with a tendency to hymn the joys of immorality. The Indian
author has taken the opposite view, and it is impossible not to admire
the delicacy with which he has handled an exceedingly delicate theme.


III.

   THE
   PERFUMED GARDEN,
   OF THE
   SHEIK NEFZAOUI,
   OR THE
   _ARAB ART OF LOVE_,

   XVITH CENTURY.

   TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH VERSION OF THE ARABIAN MS.

   [_Ready._

*** This, the authorized version, is printed in purple and red ink, and
ornamented with Arabesque Initial Ornaments.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note

All occurrences of "i.e." have been italicized for consistency.

On Page 128 there is a paragraph listed as "(2)". However, there is
no preceding paragraph listed as "(1)". This is unchanged.

The following changes have been made to the text:

Page 3: "Sancrit literature" changed to "Sanscrit literature".

Page 4: "calied Pachivedas" changed to "called Pachivedas".

Page 9: "sensual grat fication" changed to "sensual gratification".

Page 12: "written by Nundi in one" changed to "written by Nandi in one".

Page 12: "Babhravya, an inheritant" changed to "Babhravya, an
inhabitant".

Page 22 (in this version), Footnote #7: "now nnknown" changed to "now
unknown".

Page 27: "at the botttom" changed to "at the bottom".

Page 29: "should be understand" changed to "should be understood".

Page 32: "heir heads shaved" changed to "their heads shaved".

Page 33 (in this version), Footnote #29: "fiction, imitiating him"
changed to "fiction, imitating him".

Page 37 (in this version), Footnote #32: "technical term throughont"
changed to "technical term throughout".

Page 39: "highesf union" changed to "highest union".

Page 41: "if ihe ways" changed to "if the ways".

Page 45: "neither has the rice seven colours" changed to "neither has
the rice five colours".

Page 51: "is is called a" changed to "it is called a".

Page 52: "passion is e ces ve" changed to "passion is excessive".

Page 52: "Middllng" changed to "Middling".

Page 53: "breasts, it is called the" changed to "breasts, is called
the".

Page 70: "the ennuch moves about" changed to "the eunuch moves about".

Page 70: "passes the tongue ever the end" changed to "passes the tongue
over the end".

Page 71: "sonthern bank of the Jumna" changed to "southern bank of the
Jumna".

Page 72: "be made nse of" changed to "be made use of".

Page 73: "can then eat sweatmeats" changed to "can then eat sweetmeats".

Page 76: "End of Part II" added.

Page 82: "he should them embrace" changed to "he should then embrace".

Page 93 (in this version), Footnote #49: "Woman is a monaganous animal"
to "Woman is a monogamous animal".

Page 101: "remarried, or a concubine" changed to "re-married, or a
concubine".

Page 104: "Tho followers of Babhravya says" changed to "The followers of
Babhravya say".

Page 106: "the ttme of her turn" changed to "the time of her turn".

Page 110: "if his inaccesibility" changed to "if his inaccessibility".

Page 112: "A covetuous woman" changed to "A covetous woman".

Page 117: "better dressed that before" changed to "better dressed than
before".

Page 127 (in this version), Footnote #61:

   "jur√®" changed to "jur√©".

   "profound" changed to "profond".

   "Voulez vous qu'infidele" changed to "Voulez-vous qu'infid√®le".

   "language" changed "langage".

   "seul" changed to "seule".

   "et" changed to "ou".

   "gouter" changed to "go√ªter".

   "delire" changed to "d√©lire".

   "ou" changed to "o√π".

   "remede" changed to "rem√®de".

   "a" changed to "√†".

   "ou vous voit on" changed to "o√π vous voit-on".

Page 128: "moon-light" changed to "moonlight".

Page 131 (in this version), Footnote #68: "Apar ntakas" changed to
"Aparantakas".

Page 132: "t lling them" changed to "telling them".

Page 133: "easily accesible" changed to "easily accessible".

Page 133: "whem he is anxious" changed to "whom he is anxious".

Page 135: "fear of avarice" changed to "fear or avarice".

Page 136: "ways for seduciug" changed to "ways of seducing".

Page 138: "own maintainance" changed to "own maintenance".

Page 140: "beauty, and aimiability" changed to "beauty, and amiability".

Page 140: "to ssess activity" changed to "to possess activity".

Page 143 (in this version), Footnote #74: "In India" changed to "in
India".

Page 145: "him." f," changed to "him." If,".

Page 146: "account of its subtletly" changed to "account of its
subtlety".

Page 159: "aud well-to-do" changed to "and well-to-do".

Page 168: "incanations mentioned" changed to "incantations mentioned".

Page 171: "trapa bisqinosa" changed to "trapa bispinosa".

Page 173: "he of the same size" changed to "be of the same size".

Page 175: "seeds of the pomegranite" changed to "seeds of the
pomegranate".

Page 179: "ready deliverence" changed to "ready deliverance".








End of Project Gutenberg's The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana, by Vatsyayana

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KAMA SUTRA OF VATSYAYANA ***

***** This file should be named 27827-8.txt or 27827-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/8/2/27827/

Produced by Bruce Albrecht, Carla Foust, Jon Noring and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The Shunned House, by Howard Phillips Lovecraft

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Shunned House

Author: Howard Phillips Lovecraft

Release Date: March 2, 2010 [EBook #31469]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHUNNED HOUSE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        The
                             Shunned House

                        By H. P. LOVECRAFT


 _A posthumous story of immense power, written by a master of weird
   fiction--a tale of a revolting horror in the cellar of an old
                       house in New England_


    Howard Phillips Lovecraft died last March, at the height of his
    career. Though only forty-six years of age, he had built up an
    international reputation by the artistry and impeccable literary
    craftsmanship of his weird tales; and he was regarded on both sides
    of the Atlantic as probably the greatest contemporary master of
    weird fiction. His ability to create and sustain a mood of brooding
    dread and unnamable horror is nowhere better shown than in the
    posthumous tale presented here: "The Shunned House."


From even the greatest of horrors irony is seldom absent. Sometimes it
enters directly into the composition of the events, while sometimes it
relates only to their fortuitous position among persons and places. The
latter sort is splendidly exemplified by a case in the ancient city of
Providence, where in the late forties Edgar Allan Poe used to sojourn
often during his unsuccessful wooing of the gifted poetess, Mrs.
Whitman. Poe generally stopped at the Mansion House in Benefit
Street--the renamed Golden Ball Inn whose roof has sheltered Washington,
Jefferson, and Lafayette--and his favorite walk led northward along the
same street to Mrs. Whitman's home and the neighboring hillside
churchyard of St. John's, whose hidden expanse of Eighteenth Century
gravestones had for him a peculiar fascination.

Now the irony is this. In this walk, so many times repeated, the world's
greatest master of the terrible and the bizarre was obliged to pass a
particular house on the eastern side of the street; a dingy, antiquated
structure perched on the abruptly rising side hill, with a great unkempt
yard dating from a time when the region was partly open country. It does
not appear that he ever wrote or spoke of it, nor is there any evidence
that he even noticed it. And yet that house, to the two persons in
possession of certain information, equals or outranks in horror the
wildest fantasy of the genius who so often passed it unknowingly, and
stands starkly leering as a symbol of all that is unutterably hideous.

The house was--and for that matter still is--of a kind to attract the
attention of the curious. Originally a farm or semi-farm building, it
followed the average New England colonial lines of the middle Eighteenth
Century--the prosperous peaked-roof sort, with two stories and
dormerless attic, and with the Georgian doorway and interior panelling
dictated by the progress of taste at that time. It faced south, with one
gable end buried to the lower windows in the eastward rising hill, and
the other exposed to the foundations toward the street. Its
construction, over a century and a half ago, had followed the grading
and straightening of the road in that especial vicinity; for Benefit
Street--at first called Back Street--was laid out as a lane winding
amongst the graveyards of the first settlers, and straightened only when
the removal of the bodies to the North Burial Ground made it decently
possible to cut through the old family plots.

At the start, the western wall had lain some twenty feet up a
precipitous lawn from the roadway; but a widening of the street at about
the time of the Revolution sheared off most of the intervening space,
exposing the foundations so that a brick basement wall had to be made,
giving the deep cellar a street frontage with door and one window above
ground, close to the new line of public travel. When the sidewalk was
laid out a century ago the last of the intervening space was removed;
and Poe in his walks must have seen only a sheer ascent of dull gray
brick flush with the sidewalk and surmounted at a height of ten feet by
the antique shingled bulk of the house proper.

[Illustration: "That awful door in Benefit Street which I had left
ajar."]

The farm-like ground extended back very deeply up the hill, almost to
Wheaton Street. The space south of the house, abutting on Benefit
Street, was of course greatly above the existing sidewalk level, forming
a terrace bounded by a high bank wall of damp, mossy stone pierced by a
steep flight of narrow steps which led inward between canyon-like
surfaces to the upper region of mangy lawn, rheumy brick walks, and
neglected gardens whose dismantled cement urns, rusted kettles fallen
from tripods of knotty sticks, and similar paraphernalia set off the
weather-beaten front door with its broken fanlight, rotting Ionic
pilasters, and wormy triangular pediment.

       *       *       *       *       *

What I heard in my youth about the shunned house was merely that people
died there in alarmingly great numbers. That, I was told, was why the
original owners had moved out some twenty years after building the
place. It was plainly unhealthy, perhaps because of the dampness and
fungous growths in the cellar, the general sickish smell, the drafts of
the hallways, or the quality of the well and pump water. These things
were bad enough, and these were all that gained belief among the persons
whom I knew. Only the notebooks of my antiquarian uncle, Doctor Elihu
Whipple, revealed to me at length the darker, vaguer surmises which
formed an undercurrent of folklore among old-time servants and humble
folk; surmises which never travelled far, and which were largely
forgotten when Providence grew to be a metropolis with a shifting modern
population.

The general fact is, that the house was never regarded by the solid part
of the community as in any real sense "haunted." There were no
widespread tales of rattling chains, cold currents of air, extinguished
lights, or faces at the window. Extremists sometimes said the house was
"unlucky," but that is as far as even they went. What was really beyond
dispute is that a frightful proportion of persons died there; or more
accurately, _had_ died there, since after some peculiar happenings over
sixty years ago the building had become deserted through the sheer
impossibility of renting it. These persons were not all cut off suddenly
by any one cause; rather did it seem that their vitality was insidiously
sapped, so that each one died the sooner from whatever tendency to
weakness he may have naturally had. And those who did not die displayed
in varying degree a type of anemia or consumption, and sometimes a
decline of the mental faculties, which spoke ill for the salubriousness
of the building. Neighboring houses, it must be added, seemed entirely
free from the noxious quality.

This much I knew before my insistent questioning led my uncle to show me
the notes which finally embarked us both on our hideous investigation.
In my childhood the shunned house was vacant, with barren, gnarled and
terrible old trees, long, queerly pale grass and nightmarishly misshapen
weeds in the high terraced yard where birds never lingered. We boys used
to overrun the place, and I can still recall my youthful terror not only
at the morbid strangeness of this sinister vegetation, but at the
eldritch atmosphere and odor of the dilapidated house, whose unlocked
front door was often entered in quest of shudders. The small-paned
windows were largely broken, and a nameless air of desolation hung round
the precarious panelling, shaky interior shutters, peeling wall-paper,
falling plaster, rickety staircases, and such fragments of battered
furniture as still remained. The dust and cobwebs added their touch of
the fearful; and brave indeed was the boy who would voluntarily ascend
the ladder to the attic, a vast raftered length lighted only by small
blinking windows in the gable ends, and filled with a massed wreckage
of chests, chairs, and spinning-wheels which infinite years of deposit
had shrouded and festooned into monstrous and hellish shapes.

But after all, the attic was not the most terrible part of the house. It
was the dank, humid cellar which somehow exerted the strongest repulsion
on us, even though it was wholly above ground on the street side, with
only a thin door and window-pierced brick wall to separate it from the
busy sidewalk. We scarcely knew whether to haunt it in spectral
fascination, or to shun it for the sake of our souls and our sanity. For
one thing, the bad odor of the house was strongest there; and for
another thing, we did not like the white fungous growths which
occasionally sprang up in rainy summer weather from the hard earth
floor. Those fungi, grotesquely like the vegetation in the yard outside,
were truly horrible in their outlines; detestable parodies of toadstools
and Indian-pipes, whose like we had never seen in any other situation.
They rotted quickly, and at one stage became slightly phosphorescent; so
that nocturnal passers-by sometimes spoke of witch-fires glowing behind
the broken panes of the fetor-spreading windows.

We never--even in our wildest Halloween moods--visited this cellar
by night, but in some of our daytime visits could detect the
phosphorescence, especially when the day was dark and wet. There was
also a subtler thing we often thought we detected--a very strange thing
which was, however, merely suggestive at most. I refer to a sort of
cloudy whitish pattern on the dirt floor--a vague, shifting deposit of
mold or niter which we sometimes thought we could trace amidst the
sparse fungous growths near the huge fireplace of the basement kitchen.
Once in a while it struck us that this patch bore an uncanny resemblance
to a doubled-up human figure, though generally no such kinship existed,
and often there was no whitish deposit whatever.

On a certain rainy afternoon when this illusion seemed phenomenally
strong, and when, in addition, I had fancied I glimpsed a kind of thin,
yellowish, shimmering exhalation rising from the nitrous pattern toward
the yawning fireplace, I spoke to my uncle about the matter. He smiled
at this odd conceit, but it seemed that his smile was tinged with
reminiscence. Later I heard that a similar notion entered into some of
the wild ancient tales of the common folk--a notion likewise alluding to
ghoulish, wolfish shapes taken by smoke from the great chimney, and
queer contours assumed by certain of the sinuous tree-roots that thrust
their way into the cellar through the loose foundation-stones.


2

Not till my adult years did my uncle set before me the notes and data
which he had collected concerning the shunned house. Doctor Whipple was
a sane, conservative physician of the old school, and for all his
interest in the place was not eager to encourage young thoughts toward
the abnormal. His own view, postulating simply a building and location
of markedly unsanitary qualities, had nothing to do with abnormality;
but he realized that the very picturesqueness which aroused his own
interest would in a boy's fanciful mind take on all manner of gruesome
imaginative associations.

The doctor was a bachelor; a white-haired, clean-shaven, old-fashioned
gentleman, and a local historian of note, who had often broken a lance
with such controversial guardians of tradition as Sidney S. Rider and
Thomas W. Bicknell. He lived with one man-servant in a Georgian
homestead with knocker and iron-railed steps, balanced eerily on the
steep ascent of North Court Street beside the ancient brick court and
colony house where his grandfather--a cousin of that celebrated
privateersman, Captain Whipple, who burnt His Majesty's armed schooner
_Gaspee_ in 1772--had voted in the legislature on May 4, 1776, for the
independence of the Rhode Island Colony. Around him in the damp,
low-ceiled library with the musty white panelling, heavy carved
overmantel and small-paned, vine-shaded windows, were the relics and
records of his ancient family, among which were many dubious allusions
to the shunned house in Benefit Street. That pest spot lies not far
distant--for Benefit runs ledgewise just above the court house along the
precipitous hill up which the first settlement climbed.

When, in the end, my insistent pestering and maturing years evoked from
my uncle the hoarded lore I sought, there lay before me a strange enough
chronicle. Long-winded, statistical, and drearily genealogical as some
of the matter was, there ran through it a continuous thread of brooding,
tenacious horror and preternatural malevolence which impressed me even
more than it had impressed the good doctor. Separate events fitted
together uncannily, and seemingly irrelevant details held mines of
hideous possibilities. A new and burning curiosity grew in me, compared
to which my boyish curiosity was feeble and inchoate.

The first revelation led to an exhaustive research, and finally to that
shuddering quest which proved so disastrous to myself and mine. For at
the last my uncle insisted on joining the search I had commenced, and
after a certain night in that house he did not come away with me. I am
lonely without that gentle soul whose long years were filled only with
honor, virtue, good taste, benevolence, and learning. I have reared a
marble urn to his memory in St. John's churchyard--the place that Poe
loved--the hidden grove of giant willows on the hill, where tombs and
headstones huddle quietly between the hoary bulk of the church and the
houses and bank walls of Benefit Street.

The history of the house, opening amidst a maze of dates, revealed no
trace of the sinister either about its construction or about the
prosperous and honorable family who built it. Yet from the first a taint
of calamity, soon increased to boding significance, was apparent. My
uncle's carefully compiled record began with the building of the
structure in 1763, and followed the theme with an unusual amount of
detail. The shunned house, it seems, was first inhabited by William
Harris and his wife Rhoby Dexter, with their children, Elkanah, born in
1755, Abigail, born in 1757, William, Jr., born in 1759, and Ruth, born
in 1761. Harris was a substantial merchant and seaman in the West India
trade, connected with the firm of Obadiah Brown and his nephews. After
Brown's death in 1761, the new firm of Nicholas Brown & Company made him
master of the brig _Prudence_, Providence-built, of 120 tons, thus
enabling him to erect the new homestead he had desired ever since his
marriage.

The site he had chosen--a recently straightened part of the new and
fashionable Back Street, which ran along the side of the hill above
crowded Cheapside--was all that could be wished, and the building did
justice to the location. It was the best that moderate means could
afford, and Harris hastened to move in before the birth of a fifth child
which the family expected. That child, a boy, came in December; but was
still-born. Nor was any child to be born alive in that house for a
century and a half.

The next April, sickness occurred among the children, and Abigail and
Ruth died before the month was over. Doctor Job Ives diagnosed the
trouble as some infantile fever, though others declared it was more of a
mere wasting-away or decline. It seemed, in any event, to be contagious;
for Hannah Bowen, one of the two servants, died of it in the following
June. Eli Lideason, the other servant, constantly complained of
weakness; and would have returned to his father's farm in Rehoboth but
for a sudden attachment for Mehitabel Pierce, who was hired to succeed
Hannah. He died the next year--a sad year indeed, since it marked the
death of William Harris himself, enfeebled as he was by the climate of
Martinique, where his occupation had kept him for considerable periods
during the preceding decade.

The widowed Rhoby Harris never recovered from the shock of her husband's
death, and the passing of her first-born Elkanah two years later was the
final blow to her reason. In 1768 she fell victim to a mild form of
insanity, and was thereafter confined to the upper part of the house;
her elder maiden sister, Mercy Dexter, having moved in to take charge of
the family. Mercy was a plain, raw-boned woman of great strength; but
her health visibly declined from the time of her advent. She was greatly
devoted to her unfortunate sister, and had an especial affection for her
only surviving nephew William, who from a sturdy infant had become a
sickly, spindling lad. In this year the servant Mehitabel died, and the
other servant, Preserved Smith, left without coherent explanation--or at
least, with only some wild tales and a complaint that he disliked the
smell of the place. For a time Mercy could secure no more help, since
the seven deaths and case of madness, all occurring within five years'
space, had begun to set in motion the body of fireside rumor which later
became so bizarre. Ultimately, however, she obtained new servants from
out of town; Ann White, a morose woman from that part of North Kingstown
now set off as the township of Exeter, and a capable Boston man named
Zenas Low.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Ann White who first gave definite shape to the sinister idle
talk. Mercy should have known better than to hire anyone from the
Nooseneck Hill country, for that remote bit of backwoods was then, as
now, a seat of the most uncomfortable superstitions. As lately as 1892
an Exeter community exhumed a dead body and ceremoniously burnt its
heart in order to prevent certain alleged visitations injurious to the
public health and peace, and one may imagine the point of view of the
same section in 1768. Ann's tongue was perniciously active, and within a
few months Mercy discharged her, filling her place with a faithful and
amiable Amazon from Newport, Maria Robbins.

Meanwhile poor Rhoby Harris, in her madness, gave voice to dreams and
imaginings of the most hideous sort. At times her screams became
insupportable, and for long periods she would utter shrieking horrors
which necessitated her son's temporary residence with his cousin, Peleg
Harris, in Presbyterian Lane near the new college building. The boy
would seem to improve after these visits, and had Mercy been as wise as
she was well-meaning, she would have let him live permanently with
Peleg. Just what Mrs. Harris cried out in her fits of violence,
tradition hesitates to say; or rather, presents such extravagant
accounts that they nullify themselves through sheer absurdity. Certainly
it sounds absurd to hear that a woman educated only in the rudiments of
French often shouted for hours in a coarse and idiomatic form of that
language, or that the same person, alone and guarded, complained wildly
of a staring thing which bit and chewed at her. In 1772 the servant
Zenas died, and when Mrs. Harris heard of it she laughed with a shocking
delight utterly foreign to her. The next year she herself died, and was
laid to rest in the North Burial Ground beside her husband.

Upon the outbreak of trouble with Great Britain in 1775, William Harris,
despite his scant sixteen years and feeble constitution, managed to
enlist in the Army of Observation under General Greene; and from that
time on enjoyed a steady rise in health and prestige. In 1780, as a
captain in the Rhode Island forces in New Jersey under Colonel Angell,
he met and married Phebe Hetfield of Elizabethtown, whom he brought to
Providence upon his honorable discharge in the following year.

The young soldier's return was not a thing of unmitigated happiness. The
house, it is true, was still in good condition; and the street had been
widened and changed in name from Back Street to Benefit Street. But
Mercy Dexter's once robust frame had undergone a sad and curious decay,
so that she was now a stooped and pathetic figure with hollow voice and
disconcerting pallor--qualities shared to a singular degree by the one
remaining servant Maria. In the autumn of 1782 Phebe Harris gave birth
to a still-born daughter, and on the fifteenth of the next May Mercy
Dexter took leave of a useful, austere, and virtuous life.

William Harris, at last thoroughly convinced of the radically
unhealthful nature of his abode, now took steps toward quitting it and
closing it for ever. Securing temporary quarters for himself and his
wife at the newly opened Golden Ball Inn, he arranged for the building
of a new and finer house in Westminster Street, in the growing part of
the town across the Great Bridge. There, in 1785, his son Dutee was
born; and there the family dwelt till the encroachments of commerce
drove them back across the river and over the hill to Angell Street, in
the newer East Side residence district, where the late Archer Harris
built his sumptuous but hideous French-roofed mansion in 1876. William
and Phebe both succumbed to the yellow fever epidemic of 1797, but Dutee
was brought up by his cousin Rathbone Harris, Peleg's son.

Rathbone was a practical man, and rented the Benefit Street house
despite William's wish to keep it vacant. He considered it an obligation
to his ward to make the most of all the boy's property, nor did he
concern himself with the deaths and illnesses which caused so many
changes of tenants, or the steadily growing aversion with which the
house was generally regarded. It is likely that he felt only vexation
when, in 1804, the town council ordered him to fumigate the place with
sulfur, tar, and gum camphor on account of the much-discussed deaths of
four persons, presumably caused by the then diminishing fever epidemic.
They said the place had a febrile smell.

Dutee himself thought little of the house, for he grew up to be a
privateersman, and served with distinction on the _Vigilant_ under
Captain Cahoone in the War of 1812. He returned unharmed, married in
1814, and became a father on that memorable night of September 23, 1815,
when a great gale drove the waters of the bay over half the town, and
floated a tall sloop well up Westminster Street so that its masts almost
tapped the Harris windows in symbolic affirmation that the new boy,
Welcome, was a seaman's son.

Welcome did not survive his father, but lived to perish gloriously at
Fredericksburg in 1862. Neither he nor his son Archer knew of the
shunned house as other than a nuisance almost impossible to
rent--perhaps on account of the mustiness and sickly odor of unkempt old
age. Indeed, it never was rented after a series of deaths culminating in
1861, which the excitement of the war tended to throw into obscurity.
Carrington Harris, last of the male line, knew it only as a deserted and
somewhat picturesque center of legend until I told him my experience. He
had meant to tear it down and build an apartment house on the site, but
after my account decided to let it stand, install plumbing, and rent it.
Nor has he yet had any difficulty in obtaining tenants. The horror has
gone.


3

It may well be imagined how powerfully I was affected by the annals of
the Harrises. In this continuous record there seemed to me to brood a
persistent evil beyond anything in nature as I had known it; an evil
clearly connected with the house and not with the family. This
impression was confirmed by my uncle's less systematic array of
miscellaneous data--legends transcribed from servant gossip, cuttings
from the papers, copies of death certificates by fellow-physicians, and
the like. All of this material I cannot hope to give, for my uncle was a
tireless antiquarian and very deeply interested in the shunned house;
but I may refer to several dominant points which earn notice by their
recurrence through many reports from diverse sources. For example, the
servant gossip was practically unanimous in attributing to the fungous
and malodorous _cellar_ of the house a vast supremacy in evil influence.
There had been servants--Ann White especially--who would not use the
cellar kitchen, and at least three well-defined legends bore upon the
queer quasi-human or diabolic outlines assumed by tree-roots and patches
of mold in that region. These latter narratives interested me
profoundly, on account of what I had seen in my boyhood, but I felt that
most of the significance had in each case been largely obscured by
additions from the common stock of local ghost lore.

Ann White, with her Exeter superstition, had promulgated the most
extravagant and at the same time most consistent tale; alleging that
there must lie buried beneath the house one of those vampires--the dead
who retain their bodily form and live on the blood or breath of the
living--whose hideous legions send their preying shapes or spirits
abroad by night. To destroy a vampire one must, the grandmothers say,
exhume it and burn its heart, or at least drive a stake through that
organ; and Ann's dogged insistence on a search under the cellar had been
prominent in bringing about her discharge.

Her tales, however, commanded a wide audience, and were the more readily
accepted because the house indeed stood on land once used for burial
purposes. To me their interest depended less on this circumstance than
on the peculiarly appropriate way in which they dovetailed with certain
other things--the complaint of the departing servant Preserved Smith,
who had preceded Ann and never heard of her, that something "sucked his
breath" at night; the death-certificates of the fever victims of 1804,
issued by Doctor Chad Hopkins, and showing the four deceased persons all
unaccountably lacking in blood; and the obscure passages of poor Rhoby
Harris's ravings, where she complained of the sharp teeth of a
glassy-eyed, half-visible presence.

Free from unwarranted superstition though I am, these things produced in
me an odd sensation, which was intensified by a pair of widely separated
newspaper cuttings relating to deaths in the shunned house--one from the
_Providence Gazette and Country-Journal_ of April 12, 1815, and the
other from the _Daily Transcript and Chronicle_ of October 27,
1845--each of which detailed an appallingly grisly circumstance whose
duplication was remarkable. It seems that in both instances the dying
person, in 1815 a gentle old lady named Stafford and in 1845 a
schoolteacher of middle age named Eleazar Durfee, became transfigured in
a horrible way, glaring glassily and attempting to bite the throat of
the attending physician. Even more puzzling, though, was the final case
which put an end to the renting of the house--a series of anemia deaths
preceded by progressive madnesses wherein the patient would craftily
attempt the lives of his relatives by incisions in the neck or wrist.

This was in 1860 and 1861, when my uncle had just begun his medical
practise; and before leaving for the front he heard much of it from his
elder professional colleagues. The really inexplicable thing was the way
in which the victims--ignorant people, for the ill-smelling and widely
shunned house could now be rented to no others--would babble
maledictions in French, a language they could not possibly have studied
to any extent. It made one think of poor Rhoby Harris nearly a century
before, and so moved my uncle that he commenced collecting historical
data on the house after listening, some time subsequent to his return
from the war, to the first-hand account of Doctors Chase and Whitmarsh.
Indeed, I could see that my uncle had thought deeply on the subject, and
that he was glad of my own interest--an open-minded and sympathetic
interest which enabled him to discuss with me matters at which others
would merely have laughed. His fancy had not gone so far as mine, but he
felt that the place was rare in its imaginative potentialities, and
worthy of note as an inspiration in the field of the grotesque and
macabre.

For my part, I was disposed to take the whole subject with profound
seriousness, and began at once not only to review the evidence, but to
accumulate as much more as I could. I talked with the elderly Archer
Harris, then owner of the house, many times before his death in 1916;
and obtained from him and his still surviving maiden sister Alice an
authentic corroboration of all the family data my uncle had collected.
When, however, I asked them what connection with France or its language
the house could have, they confessed themselves as frankly baffled and
ignorant as I. Archer knew nothing, and all that Miss Harris could say
was that an old allusion her grandfather, Dutee Harris, had heard of
might have shed a little light. The old seaman, who had survived his son
Welcome's death in battle by two years, had not himself known the
legend, but recalled that his earliest nurse, the ancient Maria Robbins,
seemed darkly aware of something that might have lent a weird
significance to the French raving of Rhoby Harris, which she had so
often heard during the last days of that hapless woman. Maria had been
at the shunned house from 1769 till the removal of the family in 1783,
and had seen Mercy Dexter die. Once she hinted to the child Dutee of a
somewhat peculiar circumstance in Mercy's last moments, but he had soon
forgotten all about it save that it was something peculiar. The
granddaughter, moreover, recalled even this much with difficulty. She
and her brother were not so much interested in the house as was Archer's
son Carrington, the present owner, with whom I talked after my
experience.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having exhausted the Harris family of all the information it could
furnish, I turned my attention to early town records and deeds with a
zeal more penetrating than that which my uncle had occasionally shown in
the same work. What I wished was a comprehensive history of the site
from its very settlement in 1636--or even before, if any Narragansett
Indian legend could be unearthed to supply the data. I found, at the
start, that the land had been part of the long strip of home lot granted
originally to John Throckmorton; one of many similar strips beginning at
the Town Street beside the river and extending up over the hill to a
line roughly corresponding with the modern Hope Street. The Throckmorton
lot had later, of course, been much subdivided; and I became very
assiduous in tracing that section through which Back or Benefit Street
was later run. It had, as rumor indeed said, been the Throckmorton
graveyard; but as I examined the records more carefully, I found that
the graves had all been transferred at an early date to the North Burial
Ground on the Pawtucket West Road.

Then suddenly I came--by a rare piece of chance, since it was not in the
main body of records and might easily have been missed--upon something
which aroused my keenest eagerness, fitting in as it did with several of
the queerest phases of the affair. It was the record of a lease, in
1697, of a small tract of ground to an Etienne Roulet and wife. At last
the French element had appeared--that, and another deeper element of
horror which the name conjured up from the darkest recesses of my weird
and heterogeneous reading--and I feverishly studied the platting of the
locality as it had been before the cutting through and partial
straightening of Back Street between 1747 and 1758. I found what I had
half expected, that where the shunned house now stood the Roulets had
laid out their graveyard behind a one-story and attic cottage, and that
no record of any transfer of graves existed. The document, indeed, ended
in much confusion; and I was forced to ransack both the Rhode Island
Historical Society and Shepley Library before I could find a local door
which the name of Etienne Roulet would unlock. In the end I did find
something; something of such vague but monstrous import that I set about
at once to examine the cellar of the shunned house itself with a new and
excited minuteness.

The Roulets, it seemed, had come in 1696 from East Greenwich, down the
west shore of Narragansett Bay. They were Huguenots from Caude, and had
encountered much opposition before the Providence selectmen allowed them
to settle in the town. Unpopularity had dogged them in East Greenwich,
whither they had come in 1686, after the revocation of the Edict of
Nantes, and rumor said that the cause of dislike extended beyond mere
racial and national prejudice, or the land disputes which involved other
French settlers with the English in rivalries which not even Governor
Andros could quell. But their ardent Protestantism--too ardent, some
whispered--and their evident distress when virtually driven from the
village down the bay, had moved the sympathy of the town fathers. Here
the strangers had been granted a haven; and the swarthy Etienne Roulet,
less apt at agriculture than at reading queer books and drawing queer
diagrams, was given a clerical post in the warehouse at Pardon
Tillinghast's wharf, far south in Town Street. There had, however, been
a riot of some sort later on--perhaps forty years later, after old
Roulet's death--and no one seemed to hear of the family after that.

For a century and more, it appeared, the Roulets had been well
remembered and frequently discussed as vivid incidents in the quiet
life of a New England seaport. Etienne's son Paul, a surly fellow whose
erratic conduct had probably provoked the riot which wiped out the
family, was particularly a source of speculation; and though Providence
never shared the witchcraft panics of her Puritan neighbors, it was
freely intimated by old wives that his prayers were neither uttered at
the proper time nor directed toward the proper object. All this had
undoubtedly formed the basis of the legend known by old Maria Robbins.
What relation it had to the French ravings of Rhoby Harris and other
inhabitants of the shunned house, imagination or future discovery alone
could determine. I wondered how many of those who had known the legends
realized that additional link with the terrible which my wider reading
had given me; that ominous item in the annals of morbid horror which
tells of the creature _Jacques Roulet, of Caude_, who in 1598 was
condemned to death as a demoniac but afterward saved from the stake by
the Paris parliament and shut in a madhouse. He had been found covered
with blood and shreds of flesh in a wood, shortly after the killing and
rending of a boy by a pair of wolves. One wolf was seen to lope away
unhurt. Surely a pretty hearthside tale, with a queer significance as to
name and place; but I decided that the Providence gossips could not have
generally known of it. Had they known, the coincidence of names would
have brought some drastic and frightened action--indeed, might not its
limited whispering have precipitated the final riot which erased the
Roulets from the town?

       *       *       *       *       *

I now visited the accursed place with increased frequency; studying the
unwholesome vegetation of the garden, examining all the walls of the
building, and poring over every inch of the earthen cellar floor.
Finally, with Carrington Harris's permission, I fitted a key to the
disused door opening from the cellar directly upon Benefit Street,
preferring to have a more immediate access to the outside world than the
dark stairs, ground-floor hall, and front door could give. There, where
morbidity lurked most thickly, I searched and poked during long
afternoons when the sunlight filtered in through the cobwebbed
above-ground windows, and a sense of security glowed from the unlocked
door which placed me only a few feet from the placid sidewalk outside.
Nothing new rewarded my efforts--only the same depressing mustiness and
faint suggestions of noxious odors and nitrous outlines on the
floor--and I fancy that many pedestrians must have watched me curiously
through the broken panes.

At length, upon a suggestion of my uncle's, I decided to try the spot
nocturnally; and one stormy midnight ran the beams of an electric torch
over the moldy floor with its uncanny shapes and distorted,
half-phosphorescent fungi. The place had dispirited me curiously that
evening, and I was almost prepared when I saw--or thought I saw--amidst
the whitish deposits a particularly sharp definition of the "huddled
form" I had suspected from boyhood. Its clearness was astonishing and
unprecedented--and as I watched I seemed to see again the thin,
yellowish, shimmering exhalation which had startled me on that rainy
afternoon so many years before.

Above the anthropomorphic patch of mold by the fireplace it rose; a
subtle, sickish, almost luminous vapor which as it hung trembling in the
dampness seemed to develop vague and shocking suggestions of form,
gradually trailing off into nebulous decay and passing up into the
blackness of the great chimney with a fetor in its wake. It was truly
horrible, and the more so to me because of what I knew of the spot.
Refusing to flee, I watched it fade--and as I watched I felt that it was
in turn watching me greedily with eyes more imaginable than visible.
When I told my uncle about it he was greatly aroused; and after a tense
hour of reflection, arrived at a definite and drastic decision. Weighing
in his mind the importance of the matter, and the significance of our
relation to it, he insisted that we both test--and if possible
destroy--the horror of the house by a joint night or nights of
aggressive vigil in that musty and fungus-cursed cellar.


4

On Wednesday, June 25, 1919, after a proper notification of Carrington
Harris which did not include surmises as to what we expected to find, my
uncle and I conveyed to the shunned house two camp chairs and a folding
camp cot, together with some scientific mechanism of greater weight and
intricacy. These we placed in the cellar during the day, screening the
windows with paper and planning to return in the evening for our first
vigil. We had locked the door from the cellar to the ground floor; and
having a key to the outside cellar door, were prepared to leave our
expensive and delicate apparatus--which we had obtained secretly and at
great cost--as many days as our vigils might be protracted. It was our
design to sit up together till very late, and then watch singly till
dawn in two-hour stretches, myself first and then my companion; the
inactive member resting on the cot.

The natural leadership with which my uncle procured the instruments from
the laboratories of Brown University and the Cranston Street Armory, and
instinctively assumed direction of our venture, was a marvelous
commentary on the potential vitality and resilience of a man of
eighty-one. Elihu Whipple had lived according to the hygienic laws he
had preached as a physician, and but for what happened later would be
here in full vigor today. Only two persons suspected what did
happen--Carrington Harris and myself. I had to tell Harris because he
owned the house and deserved to know what had gone out of it. Then too,
we had spoken to him in advance of our quest; and I felt after my
uncle's going that he would understand and assist me in some vitally
necessary public explanations. He turned very pale, but agreed to help
me, and decided that it would now be safe to rent the house.

To declare that we were not nervous on that rainy night of watching
would be an exaggeration both gross and ridiculous. We were not, as I
have said, in any sense childishly superstitious, but scientific study
and reflection had taught us that the known universe of three dimensions
embraces the merest fraction of the whole cosmos of substance and
energy. In this case an overwhelming preponderance of evidence from
numerous authentic sources pointed to the tenacious existence of certain
forces of great power and, so far as the human point of view is
concerned, exceptional malignancy. To say that we actually believed in
vampires or werewolves would be a carelessly inclusive statement. Rather
must it be said that we were not prepared to deny the possibility of
certain unfamiliar and unclassified modifications of vital force and
attenuated matter; existing very infrequently in three-dimensional space
because of its more intimate connection with other spatial units, yet
close enough to the boundary of our own to furnish us occasional
manifestations which we, for lack of a proper vantage-point, may never
hope to understand.

In short, it seemed to my uncle and me that an incontrovertible array
of facts pointed to some lingering influence in the shunned house;
traceable to one or another of the ill-favored French settlers of two
centuries before, and still operative through rare and unknown laws of
atomic and electronic motion. That the family of Roulet had possessed an
abnormal affinity for outer circles of entity--dark spheres which for
normal folk hold only repulsion and terror--their recorded history
seemed to prove. Had not, then, the riots of those bygone
seventeen-thirties set moving certain kinetic patterns in the morbid
brain of one or more of them--notably the sinister Paul Roulet--which
obscurely survived the bodies murdered and buried by the mob, and
continued to function in some multiple-dimensioned space along the
original lines of force determined by a frantic hatred of the
encroaching community?

Such a thing was surely not a physical or biochemical impossibility in
the light of a newer science which includes the theories of relativity
and intra-atomic action. One might easily imagine an alien nucleus of
substance or energy, formless or otherwise, kept alive by imperceptible
or immaterial subtractions from the life-force or bodily tissue and
fluids of other and more palpably living things into which it penetrates
and with whose fabric it sometimes completely merges itself. It might be
actively hostile, or it might be dictated merely by blind motives of
self-preservation. In any case such a monster must of necessity be in
our scheme of things an anomaly and an intruder, whose extirpation forms
a primary duty with every man not an enemy to the world's life, health,
and sanity.

What baffled us was our utter ignorance of the aspect in which we might
encounter the thing. No sane person had ever seen it, and few had ever
felt it definitely. It might be pure energy--a form ethereal and outside
the realm of substance--or it might be partly material; some unknown and
equivocal mass of plasticity, capable of changing at will to nebulous
approximations of the solid, liquid, gaseous, or tenuously unparticled
states. The anthropomorphic patch of mold on the floor, the form of the
yellowish vapor, and the curvature of the tree-roots in some of the old
tales, all argued at least a remote and reminiscent connection with the
human shape; but how representative or permanent that similarity might
be, none could say with any kind of certainty.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had devised two weapons to fight it; a large and specially fitted
Crookes tube operated by powerful storage batteries and provided with
peculiar screens and reflectors, in case it proved intangible and
opposable only by vigorously destructive ether radiations, and a pair of
military flame-throwers of the sort used in the World War, in case it
proved partly material and susceptible of mechanical destruction--for
like the superstitious Exeter rustics, we were prepared to burn the
thing's heart out if heart existed to burn. All this aggressive
mechanism we set in the cellar in positions carefully arranged with
reference to the cot and chairs, and to the spot before the fireplace
where the mold had taken strange shapes. That suggestive patch, by the
way, was only faintly visible when we placed our furniture and
instruments, and when we returned that evening for the actual vigil. For
a moment I half doubted that I had ever seen it in the more definitely
limned form--but then I thought of the legends.

Our cellar vigil began at ten p. m., daylight saving time, and as it
continued we found no promise of pertinent developments. A weak,
filtered glow from the rain-harassed street-lamps outside, and a feeble
phosphorescence from the detestable fungi within, showed the dripping
stone of the walls, from which all traces of whitewash had vanished; the
dank, fetid and mildew-tainted hard earth floor with its obscene fungi;
the rotting remains of what had been stools, chairs, and tables, and
other more shapeless furniture; the heavy planks and massive beams of
the ground floor overhead; the decrepit plank door leading to bins and
chambers beneath other parts of the house; the crumbling stone staircase
with ruined wooden hand-rail; and the crude and cavernous fireplace of
blackened brick where rusted iron fragments revealed the past presence
of hooks, andirons, spit, crane, and a door to the Dutch oven--these
things, and our austere cot and camp chairs, and the heavy and intricate
destructive machinery we had brought.

We had, as in my own former explorations, left the door to the street
unlocked; so that a direct and practical path of escape might lie open
in case of manifestations beyond our power to deal with. It was our idea
that our continued nocturnal presence would call forth whatever malign
entity lurked there; and that being prepared, we could dispose of the
thing with one or the other of our provided means as soon as we had
recognized and observed it sufficiently. How long it might require to
evoke and extinguish the thing, we had no notion. It occurred to us,
too, that our venture was far from safe; for in what strength the thing
might appear no one could tell. But we deemed the game worth the hazard,
and embarked on it alone and unhesitatingly; conscious that the seeking
of outside aid would only expose us to ridicule and perhaps defeat our
entire purpose. Such was our frame of mind as we talked--far into the
night, till my uncle's growing drowsiness made me remind him to lie down
for his two-hour sleep.

Something like fear chilled me as I sat there in the small hours
alone--I say alone, for one who sits by a sleeper is indeed alone;
perhaps more alone than he can realize. My uncle breathed heavily, his
deep inhalations and exhalations accompanied by the rain outside, and
punctuated by another nerve-racking sound of distant dripping water
within--for the house was repulsively damp even in dry weather, and in
this storm positively swamp-like. I studied the loose, antique masonry
of the walls in the fungus-light and the feeble rays which stole in from
the street through the screened window; and once, when the noisome
atmosphere of the place seemed about to sicken me, I opened the door and
looked up and down the street, feasting my eyes on familiar sights and
my nostrils on wholesome air. Still nothing occurred to reward my
watching; and I yawned repeatedly, fatigue getting the better of
apprehension.

Then the stirring of my uncle in his sleep attracted my notice. He had
turned restlessly on the cot several times during the latter half of the
first hour, but now he was breathing with unusual irregularity,
occasionally heaving a sigh which held more than a few of the qualities
of a choking moan.

I turned my electric flashlight on him and found his face averted; so
rising and crossing to the other side of the cot, I again flashed the
light to see if he seemed in any pain. What I saw unnerved me most
surprisingly, considering its relative triviality. It must have been
merely the association of any odd circumstance with the sinister nature
of our location and mission, for surely the circumstance was not in
itself frightful or unnatural. It was merely that my uncle's facial
expression, disturbed no doubt by the strange dreams which our
situation prompted, betrayed considerable agitation, and seemed not at
all characteristic of him. His habitual expression was one of kindly and
well-bred calm, whereas now a variety of emotions seemed struggling
within him. I think, on the whole, that it was this _variety_ which
chiefly disturbed me. My uncle, as he gasped and tossed in increasing
perturbation and with eyes that had now started open, seemed not one but
many men, and suggested a curious quality of alienage from himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

All at once he commenced to mutter, and I did not like the look of his
mouth and teeth as he spoke. The words were at first indistinguishable,
and then--with a tremendous start--I recognized something about them
which filled me with icy fear till I recalled the breadth of my uncle's
education and the interminable translations he had made from
anthropological and antiquarian articles in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_.
For the venerable Elihu Whipple was muttering _in French_, and the few
phrases I could distinguish seemed connected with the darkest myths he
had ever adapted from the famous Paris magazine.

Suddenly a perspiration broke out on the sleeper's forehead, and he
leaped abruptly up, half awake. The jumble of French changed to a cry in
English, and the hoarse voice shouted excitedly, "My breath, my breath!"
Then the awakening became complete, and with a subsidence of facial
expression to the normal state my uncle seized my hand and began to
relate a dream whose nucleus of significance I could only surmise with a
kind of awe.

He had, he said, floated off from a very ordinary series of
dream-pictures into a scene whose strangeness was related to nothing he
had ever read. It was of this world, and yet not of it--a shadowy
geometrical confusion in which could be seen elements of familiar things
in most unfamiliar and perturbing combinations. There was a suggestion
of queerly disordered pictures superimposed one upon another; an
arrangement in which the essentials of time as well as of space seemed
dissolved and mixed in the most illogical fashion. In this kaleidoscopic
vortex of phantasmal images were occasional snap-shots, if one might use
the term, of singular clearness but unaccountable heterogeneity.

Once my uncle thought he lay in a carelessly dug open pit, with a crowd
of angry faces framed by straggling locks and three-cornered hats
frowning down on him. Again he seemed to be in the interior of a
house--an old house, apparently--but the details and inhabitants were
constantly changing, and he could never be certain of the faces or the
furniture, or even of the room itself, since doors and windows seemed in
just as great a state of flux as the presumably more mobile objects. It
was queer--damnably queer--and my uncle spoke almost sheepishly, as if
half expecting not to be believed, when he declared that of the strange
faces many had unmistakably borne the features of the Harris family. And
all the while there was a personal sensation of choking, as if some
pervasive presence had spread itself through his body and sought to
possess itself of his vital processes.

I shuddered at the thought of those vital processes, worn as they were
by eighty-one years of continuous functioning, in conflict with unknown
forces of which the youngest and strongest system might well be afraid;
but in another moment reflected that dreams are only dreams, and that
these uncomfortable visions could be, at most, no more than my uncle's
reaction to the investigations and expectations which had lately filled
our minds to the exclusion of all else.

Conversation, also, soon tended to dispel my sense of strangeness; and
in time I yielded to my yawns and took my turn at slumber. My uncle
seemed now very wakeful, and welcomed his period of watching even though
the nightmare had aroused him far ahead of his allotted two hours.

Sleep seized me quickly, and I was at once haunted with dreams of the
most disturbing kind. I felt, in my visions, a cosmic and abysmal
loneness; with hostility surging from all sides upon some prison where I
lay confined. I seemed bound and gagged, and taunted by the echoing
yells of distant multitudes who thirsted for my blood. My uncle's face
came to me with less pleasant association than in waking hours, and I
recall many futile struggles and attempts to scream. It was not a
pleasant sleep, and for a second I was not sorry for the echoing shriek
which clove through the barriers of dream and flung me to a sharp and
startled awakeness in which every actual object before my eyes stood out
with more than natural clearness and reality.


5

I had been lying with my face away from my uncle's chair, so that in
this sudden flash of awakening I saw only the door to the street, the
window, and the wall and floor and ceiling toward the north of the room,
all photographed with morbid vividness on my brain in a light brighter
than the glow of the fungi or the rays from the street outside. It was
not a strong or even a fairly strong light; certainly not nearly strong
enough to read an average book by. But it cast a shadow of myself and
the cot on the floor, and had a yellowish, penetrating force that hinted
at things more potent than luminosity. This I perceived with unhealthy
sharpness despite the fact that two of my other senses were violently
assailed. For on my ears rang the reverberations of that shocking
scream, while my nostrils revolted at the stench which filled the place.
My mind, as alert as my senses, recognized the gravely unusual; and
almost automatically I leaped up and turned about to grasp the
destructive instruments which we had left trained on the moldy spot
before the fireplace. As I turned, I dreaded what I was to see; for the
scream had been in my uncle's voice, and I knew not against what menace
I should have to defend him and myself.

Yet after all, the sight was worse than I had dreaded. There are horrors
beyond horrors, and this was one of those nuclei of all dreamable
hideousness which the cosmos saves to blast an accursed and unhappy few.
Out of the fungus-ridden earth steamed up a vaporous corpse-light,
yellow and diseased, which bubbled and lapped to a gigantic height in
vague outlines half human and half monstrous, through which I could see
the chimney and fireplace beyond. It was all eyes--wolfish and
mocking--and the rugose insect-like head dissolved at the top to a thin
stream of mist which curled putridly about and finally vanished up the
chimney. I say that I saw this thing, but it is only in conscious
retrospection that I ever definitely traced its damnable approach to
form. At the time, it was to me only a seething, dimly phosphorescent
cloud of fungous loathsomeness, enveloping and dissolving to an
abhorrent plasticity the one object on which all my attention was
focussed. That object was my uncle--the venerable Elihu Whipple--who
with blackening and decaying features leered and gibbered at me, and
reached out dripping claws to rend me in the fury which this horror had
brought.

It was a sense of routine which kept me from going mad. I had drilled
myself in preparation for the crucial moment, and blind training saved
me. Recognizing the bubbling evil as no substance reachable by matter or
material chemistry, and therefore ignoring the flame-thrower which
loomed on my left, I threw on the current of the Crookes tube apparatus,
and focussed toward that scene of immortal blasphemousness the strongest
ether radiations which man's art can arouse from the spaces and fluids
of nature. There was a bluish haze and a frenzied sputtering, and the
yellowish phosphorescence grew dimmer to my eyes. But I saw the dimness
was only that of contrast, and that the waves from the machine had no
effect whatever.

Then, in the midst of that demoniac spectacle, I saw a fresh horror
which brought cries to my lips and sent me fumbling and staggering
toward that unlocked door to the quiet street, careless of what abnormal
terrors I loosed upon the world, or what thoughts or judgments of men I
brought down upon my head. In that dim blend of blue and yellow the form
of my uncle had commenced a nauseous liquefaction whose essence eludes
all description, and in which there played across his vanishing face
such changes of identity as only madness can conceive. He was at once a
devil and a multitude, a charnel-house and a pageant. Lit by the mixed
and uncertain beams, that gelatinous face assumed a dozen--a score--a
hundred--aspects; grinning, as it sank to the ground on a body that
melted like tallow, in the caricatured likeness of legions strange and
yet not strange.

I saw the features of the Harris line, masculine and feminine, adult and
infantile, and other features old and young, coarse and refined,
familiar and unfamiliar. For a second there flashed a degraded
counterfeit of a miniature of poor mad Rhoby Harris that I had seen in
the School of Design museum, and another time I thought I caught the
raw-boned image of Mercy Dexter as I recalled her from a painting in
Carrington Harris's house. It was frightful beyond conception; toward
the last, when a curious blend of servant and baby visages flickered
close to the fungous floor where a pool of greenish grease was
spreading, it seemed as though the shifting features fought against
themselves and strove to form contours like those of my uncle's kindly
face. I like to think that he existed at that moment, and that he tried
to bid me farewell. It seems to me I hiccupped a farewell from my own
parched throat as I lurched out into the street; a thin stream of grease
following me through the door to the rain-drenched sidewalk.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rest is shadowy and monstrous. There was no one in the soaking
street, and in all the world there was no one I dared tell. I walked
aimlessly south past College Hill and the Athen√¶um, down Hopkins Street,
and over the bridge to the business section where tall buildings seemed
to guard me as modern material things guard the world from ancient and
unwholesome wonder. Then gray dawn unfolded wetly from the east,
silhouetting the archaic hill and its venerable steeples, and beckoning
me to the place where my terrible work was still unfinished. And in the
end I went, wet, hatless, and dazed in the morning light, and entered
that awful door in Benefit Street which I had left ajar, and which still
swung cryptically in full sight of the early householders to whom I
dared not speak.

The grease was gone, for the moldy floor was porous. And in front of the
fireplace was no vestige of the giant doubled-up form traced in niter.
I looked at the cot, the chairs, the instruments, my neglected hat, and
the yellowed straw hat of my uncle. Dazedness was uppermost, and I could
scarcely recall what was dream and what was reality. Then thought
trickled back, and I knew that I had witnessed things more horrible than
I had dreamed.

Sitting down, I tried to conjecture as nearly as sanity would let me
just what had happened, and how I might end the horror, if indeed it had
been real. Matter it seemed not to be, nor ether, nor anything else
conceivable by mortal mind. What, then, but some exotic _emanation_;
some vampirish vapor such as Exeter rustics tell of as lurking over
certain churchyards? This I felt was the clue, and again I looked at the
floor before the fireplace where the mold and niter had taken strange
forms.

In ten minutes my mind was made up, and taking my hat I set out for
home, where I bathed, ate, and gave by telephone an order for a pickax,
a spade, a military gas-mask, and six carboys of sulfuric acid, all to
be delivered the next morning at the cellar door of the shunned house in
Benefit Street. After that I tried to sleep; and failing, passed the
hours in reading and in the composition of inane verses to counteract my
mood.

At eleven a. m. the next day I commenced digging. It was sunny weather,
and I was glad of that. I was still alone, for as much as I feared the
unknown horror I sought, there was more fear in the thought of telling
anybody. Later I told Harris only through sheer necessity, and because
he had heard odd tales from old people which disposed him ever so little
toward belief. As I turned up the stinking black earth in front of the
fireplace, my spade causing a viscous yellow ichor to ooze from the
white fungi which it severed, I trembled at the dubious thoughts of what
I might uncover. Some secrets of inner earth are not good for mankind,
and this seemed to me one of them.

My hand shook perceptibly, but still I delved; after a while standing in
the large hole I had made. With the deepening of the hole, which was
about six feet square, the evil smell increased; and I lost all doubt of
my imminent contact with the hellish thing whose emanations had cursed
the house for over a century and a half. I wondered what it would look
like--what its form and substance would be, and how big it might have
waxed through long ages of life-sucking. At length I climbed out of the
hole and dispersed the heaped-up dirt, then arranging the great carboys
of acid around and near two sides, so that when necessary I might empty
them all down the aperture in quick succession. After that I dumped
earth only along the other two sides; working more slowly and donning my
gas-mask as the smell grew. I was nearly unnerved at my proximity to a
nameless thing at the bottom of a pit.

Suddenly my spade struck something softer than earth. I shuddered, and
made a motion as if to climb out of the hole, which was now as deep as
my neck. Then courage returned, and I scraped away more dirt in the
light of the electric torch I had provided. The surface I uncovered was
fishy and glassy--a kind of semi-putrid congealed jelly with suggestions
of translucency. I scraped further, and saw that it had form. There was
a rift where a part of the substance was folded over. The exposed area
was huge and roughly cylindrical; like a mammoth soft blue-white
stovepipe doubled in two, its largest part some two feet in diameter.
Still more I scraped, and then abruptly I leaped out of the hole and
away from the filthy thing; frantically unstopping and tilting the heavy
carboys, and precipitating their corrosive contents one after another
down that charnel gulf and upon the unthinkable abnormality whose titan
_elbow_ I had seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

The blinding maelstrom of greenish-yellow vapor which surged
tempestuously up from that hole as the floods of acid descended, will
never leave my memory. All along the hill people tell of the yellow day,
when virulent and horrible fumes arose from the factory waste dumped in
the Providence River, but I know how mistaken they are as to the source.
They tell, too, of the hideous roar which at the same time came from
some disordered water-pipe or gas main underground--but again I could
correct them if I dared. It was unspeakably shocking, and I do not see
how I lived through it. I did faint after emptying the fourth carboy,
which I had to handle after the fumes had begun to penetrate my mask;
but when I recovered I saw that the hole was emitting no fresh vapors.

The two remaining carboys I emptied down without particular result, and
after a time I felt it safe to shovel the earth back into the pit. It
was twilight before I was done, but fear had gone out of the place. The
dampness was less fetid, and all the strange fungi had withered to a
kind of harmless grayish powder which blew ash-like along the floor. One
of earth's nethermost terrors had perished for ever; and if there be a
hell, it had received at last the demon soul of an unhallowed thing. And
as I patted down the last spadeful of mold, I shed the first of the many
tears with which I have paid unaffected tribute to my beloved uncle's
memory.

The next spring no more pale grass and strange weeds came up in the
shunned house's terraced garden, and shortly afterward Carrington Harris
rented the place. It is still spectral, but its strangeness fascinates
me, and I shall find mixed with my relief a queer regret when it is torn
down to make way for a tawdry shop or vulgar apartment building. The
barren old trees in the yard have begun to bear small, sweet apples, and
last year the birds nested in their gnarled boughs.


[Illustration]




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Weird Tales_ October 1937. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Shunned House, by Howard Phillips Lovecraft

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHUNNED HOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 31469-8.txt or 31469-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/4/6/31469/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Simple Italian Cookery, by Antonia Isola

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Simple Italian Cookery

Author: Antonia Isola

Release Date: August, 2004 [EBook #6385]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on December 5, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIMPLE ITALIAN COOKERY ***




Produced by David Starner, Karen Fabrizius
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.




SIMPLE ITALIAN COOKERY

Antonia Isola




CONTENTS


Soups
Macaroni and other Pastes
Rice, Etc.
Sauces
Eggs
Fish
Vegetables
Meats
Salads
Desserts
Index




SOUPS


BEEF SOUP STOCK
(_Brodo di Carne_)

  1 pound of round of beef
  2 quarts of water
  2 small, new carrots, or 1/2 of an old carrot
  1/2 pound of beef bones
  2 small potatoes
  1 onion
  1 tomato, fresh or canned
  Parsley

Boil the beef, bones, and vegetables in two quarts of water over a
slow fire--adding pepper and salt. Skim occasionally, and after two
hours add two tablespoons of sherry; then strain through fine
soup-strainer or cheese-cloth. This is the basis of all the following
soups, except when otherwise stated.

To make this stock richer, add a turkey leg to above receipt; boil one
and a half hours, then add one-half a pound of finely chopped beef.
Cook for half an hour longer, then strain.

To make meat jelly, add a little gelatine to the soup stock five
minutes before straining.

To give a good dark color to the stock, add a few drops of "caramel,"
which is prepared in the following manner:

Put three tablespoons of granulated sugar into a saucepan with a
little water, and until the sugar has become dark and reddish; then
add a little more water and boil again until the sugar is melted.
Strain and pour into a bottle when the caramel will keep perfectly for
several weeks.


CHICKEN BROTH
(_Brodo di Capone_)

This is made like the meat stock, substituting a fowl in place of the
beef and bones.


RICE SOUP
(_Minestra di Riso_)

  Meat stock
  2 tablespoons of rice

Cover the rice with water and boil for ten minutes; then drain and add
to the stock (after it has been strained), and boil for five or ten
minutes more.


STRACCIATELLA SOUP
(_Minestra di Stracciatella_)

  1 egg
  1/2 tablespoon of Parmesan cheese
  1 tablespoon bread crumbs

Beat the egg, yolk and white together; add salt and the cheese,
grated, and the bread crumbs; mix well together and add to the boiling
stock (strained). Stir well with a fork to prevent the egg from
setting, and boil for four or five minutes.


VEGETABLE CHOWDER
(_Minestrone alla Milanese_)

  1/2 quart of stock
  2 slices of lean pork, or a ham bone
  2 tomatoes, fresh or canned
  1 cup of rice
  2 tablespoons of dried beans
  1 tablespoon of peas, fresh or canned
  2 onions

Put into the stock the slices of pork, cut into small pieces; or, if
desired, a ham bone may be substituted for the pork. Add the tomatoes,
cut into small pieces also, the onions, in small pieces, and the rice.
Boil all together until the rice is cooked. Then add the beans and the
peas and cook a little longer. The soup is ready when it is thick. If
desired, this chowder can be made with fish broth instead of the
stock, and with the addition of shrimps which have been taken from
their shells.

This dish can be served hot or cold.


FISH BROTH
(_Brodo di Pesce_)

  1 liberal pound of fresh codfish, or any other lean fish for boiling
  1 quart of water
  1 onion
  Parsley
  Salt and pepper

Boil until fish is thoroughly cooked; strain and serve.


CODFISH SOUP
(_Zuppa di Merluzzo_)

Take one-half pound of salt codfish that has been soaked, cut it up
into squares, but not small.

Prepare in a saucepan four tablespoons of good olive-oil, and one
small onion cut into pieces. Cook the onion in the oil over a slow
fire, without allowing the onion to become colored, then add a small
bunch of parsley stems, a small piece of celery, a bay-leaf, and a
small sprig of thyme. Cool for a few moments, then add two tomatoes,
skinned and with the seeds removed, and cut into slices, two
tablespoons of dry white wine, and one medium-sized potato, peeled and
cut into slices, and, lastly, one cup of water.

When the potato is half cooked, add the codfish, then one-half
tablespoon more of olive-oil. Remove the parsley stems, and put in
instead one-half tablespoon of chopped-up parsley; add a good pinch of
pepper, and some salt, if needed. When the vegetables are thoroughly
cooked pour the soup over pieces of toasted or fried bread, and serve.


LENTIL SOUP
(_Brodo di Lenticchie_)

  3 tablespoons of dried lentils
  1/2 tablespoon of butter
  2 tablespoons of cream
  Meat stock

Cover the lentils with water and boil until they are quite soft. Pass
them through a colander or a sieve. Melt the butter in a saucepan,
add the lentils and cream, mixing well, then add a ladleful of the
stock, and boil for a few minutes; then add the rest of the desired
amount of stock, a ladleful at a time.


VEGETABLE SOUP
(_Zuppa alla Primaverile_)

Take some cabbage, carrots, celery, onions, turnips, lettuce, squash,
potatoes, beans, and peas. Chop each into very small pieces, wash and
drain. Take a saucepan, put in a heaping tablespoon of butter; chop up
another small piece of onion and add to butter and fry until onion is
golden; then add all the vegetables, salt, and pepper, and cover the
saucepan. When the vegetables are half cooked, and their juice has
become absorbed, dissolve one tablespoon of tomato paste in one-third
of a cup of hot water, and add. Instead of the tomato paste there may
be added to the onion, before putting in the vegetables, one tomato,
peeled and cut into small pieces. When the tomato is cooked add the
vegetables. Then add water, a little at a time, until you have
sufficient quantity for two persons. Take a slice of bread and cut
into small squares or diamonds--toast or fry as desired--put these
into the soup plates, and pour the soup (without straining) over them.


LETTUCE SOUP
(_Zuppa di Lattuga_)

  1 small lettuce
  Meat stock
  2 potatoes
  The leaves of a head of celery
  2 tablespoons of peas, fresh or canned
  1 heaping tablespoon of flour

Put the potatoes, cold boiled, into the stock when it boils, add the
celery leaves, the lettuce chopped up, the peas, and the flour mixed
well with a little cold stock or water. Boil for one hour and a half,
and serve with little squares of fried bread.


PUMPKIN SOUP
(_Zuppa di Zucca_)

  1 slice of pumpkin
  2 tablespoons of butter
  1/2 cup of water
  1-1/2 cups of milk
  1 tablespoon of sugar

Peel the pumpkin and remove the seeds, cut into small pieces, and put
into a saucepan with the butter, the sugar, a pinch of salt, and the
water. Boil for two hours, then drain and put back into the saucepan
with the milk, which has been boiled. Allow it to come to a boil, and
then serve it with squares of fried bread.


POTATO SOUP
(_Zuppa alla Provinciale_)

  2 large potatoes
  3 tablespoons of cream or milk
  2 tablespoons of butter
  2 yolks of eggs
  Soup stock

Boil the potatoes, then rub them through a sieve. Put them into a
saucepan with the butter, a little salt, and the cream or milk. Simmer
until it is thick, then add the yolks of the two eggs to form it into
a paste. Turn out onto the bread-board, cut into small dice, and throw
them into the stock, which must be boiling. If desired, before serving
sprinkle a little Parmesan cheese into the soup.




MACARONI AND OTHER PASTES


MACARONI WITH TOMATO SAUCE
(_Maccheroni al Sugo_)

  2 quarts of water
  3/4 pound of macaroni

Boil the water until it makes big bubbles. Add salt, then break the
macaroni and put it in. Cover the saucepan and boil for fifteen
minutes. The saucepan should not be too small, otherwise the macaroni
will stick to the bottom.

Prepare the sauce as follows:

Take a good slice of ham fat, and chop very fine with it a piece of
onion, a piece of celery, and some parsley. Then put this into a
frying-pan and cook until the grease is colored. (If desired, add a
small lump of butter.) When well colored add two tablespoons of tomato
paste dissolved in a little hot water. Boil all together for fifteen
minutes.

Drain the macaroni, and put it into the frying-pan with the sauce, mix
well with fork and spoon over the fire, so that the macaroni will be
thoroughly seasoned, then add three tablespoons of grated Parmesan
cheese, mix again, and serve.

If no tomato paste is available make the tomato sauce as follows:

Chop up fine one-quarter of an onion, a piece of celery the length of
a finger, two or three basil-leaves, and a small bunch of parsley.
Slice seven or eight tomatoes (fresh or canned), add salt and pepper,
and put all on together to cook in four tablespoons of good olive-oil.
Stir occasionally, and when it becomes as thick as cream, strain, and
add the macaroni as before directed.


MACARONI WITH MEAT AND SAUCE
(_Maccheroni al sugo di Carne_)

Take one-half pound of beef without fat. Prepare the ham fat as in the
preceding receipt, chopped up with onion, celery, and parsley. Cut the
meat into several pieces, put it with the fat, etc., into a
frying-pan. Add salt and pepper. Cook until the meat is colored, then
add two tablespoons of wine, white or red. When the wine is absorbed
add two tablespoons of tomato paste dissolved in hot water. (Or tomato
sauce as in preceding.) Boil all together for five minutes, with cover
on the saucepan, then add one cup of boiling water, and allow it to
simmer until the meat is thoroughly cooked--about one-half an hour.
Boil and strain the macaroni as before, and pour over it the sauce
from the meat. Mix well, and serve with the meat in the middle and the
macaroni around it, with cheese (grated Parmesan) sprinkled over it.

This dish can be made with veal or mutton instead of the beef.


MACARONI WITH BUTTER AND CHEESE
(_Maccheroni al Burro_)

Boil and drain the macaroni. Take four tablespoons of table-butter,
three tablespoons of grated Parmesan cheese, add to the macaroni in
the saucepan, mix well over the fire, and serve.


SICILIAN MACARONI WITH EGGPLANT

Slice one eggplant and put it under a weighted plate to extract the
bitter juices. Then fry the slices delicately in lard. Make a ragout
of chickens' hearts and livers as follows: Put two tablespoons of
butter into a saucepan, fry the hearts and livers, and when cooked add
two tablespoons of tomato paste, thinned with hot water (or a
corresponding amount of tomato sauce). Cook for fifteen minutes.

Prepare three-quarters of a pound of macaroni, boiled and drained,
then put it into the saucepan with the hearts and livers, add the
eggplant and three tablespoons of grated Parmesan cheese. Mix well
together and serve.


VERMICELLI WITH OLIVE-OIL AND ANCHOVIES

Take one-half pound of vermicelli, boil in salted water and drain.
While boiling put into a saucepan three anchovies, cut up fine, with
four tablespoons of olive-oil. Fry the anchovies in the oil, then put
the vermicelli into the saucepan, mix well for a few moments on the
fire, then serve.


VERMICELLI WITH OLIVE-OIL, OLIVES, CAPERS, AND ANCHOVIES

Take one-half pound of vermicelli and cover it well with salted water.
Cook for about ten minutes. While it is boiling put into a saucepan
four tablespoons of olive-oil, three anchovies cut up fine with six
olives (ripe ones preferable) and one-half tablespoon of capers. When
these are fried add the vermicelli (well drained), mix well, and put
the saucepan at the back of the stove. Turn the vermicelli over with a
fork every few minutes until it is thoroughly cooked.


VERMICELLI WITH FISH

Boil one-half pound of vermicelli in salted water, drain, and mix with
two tablespoons of olive-oil and a little chopped-up parsley. Then set
to one side to get cool.

Take five smelts, split them, take out the bones, and fry them
slightly in one teaspoon of olive-oil.

Butter a pan and sprinkle it with bread crumbs. Then put into it
one-half of the cold vermicelli. Pour over this some thick tomato
sauce (one tablespoon of tomato paste cooked in two tablespoons of
olive-oil). Then put in the smelts cut in two, some anchovy, a few
capers, and three or four ripe olives chopped up with one mushroom.
Then add the rest of the tomato sauce, then the other half of the
vermicelli, and on top a layer of bread crumbs. Season all well with
salt and pepper. Put the pan into a moderate oven, and cook about an
hour and a quarter, adding a little olive-oil when necessary, so that
it will not dry up too much.

Any fish may be used instead of the smelts, cutting it into thin
strips.


SPAGHETTI WITH TUNNY-FISH

While one-half pound of spaghetti is boiling in salted water prepare
the following: Take two ounces of tunny-fish and cut them into small
pieces. Put them into a saucepan and fry them in their own oil. This
oil is generally sufficient, but should it not be, add another
tablespoon of olive-oil. When the tunny have been fried add a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley and four tomatoes, peeled and the seeds
removed, and a pinch of pepper. Let the tomatoes cook thoroughly.
When they are cooked put the spaghetti into the saucepan and move them
about with a fork and spoon until they are thoroughly mixed with the
sauce and the tunny. Then serve.


TIMBALE OF VERMICELLI WITH TOMATOES
(_Neapolitan Receipt_)

Take ten medium-sized fresh tomatoes and cut them in two crosswise.
Put a layer of these into a baking-dish with the liquid side touching
the bottom of the dish. Now put another layer with the liquid side up,
sprinkle on salt and pepper. Break the raw vermicelli the length of
the baking-dish and put a layer of it on top of the tomatoes. Now add
another layer of the tomatoes, with the skin side touching the
vermicelli, a second layer with the liquid side up, salt and pepper,
and another layer of the raw vermicelli, and so on, the top layer
being of tomatoes with their liquid side touching the vermicelli. Heat
three or four tablespoons of good lard (or butter), and when the lard
boils pour it over the tomatoes and vermicelli; then put the dish into
the oven and cook until the vermicelli is thoroughly done. After
cooling a little while, turn it out into a platter.


MACARONI "ALLA SAN GIOVANNELLO"

While three-quarters of a pound of macaroni are boiling in salted
water prepare the following: Chop up fine two ounces of ham fat with a
little parsley. Peel six medium-sized tomatoes, cut them open, remove
the seeds, and any hard or unripe parts, and put them on one side.
Take a frying-pan and put into it one scant tablespoon of butter and
the chopped ham fat. When the grease is colored put in the sliced
tomatoes with salt and pepper. When the tomatoes are cooked and begin
to sputter put the macaroni into the pan with them, mix well, add
grated Parmesan cheese, and serve.


RIBBON MACARONI
(_Pasta fatta in Casa. Fettuccini_)

  2 1/2 cups of flour
  2 eggs
  3 tablespoons of cold water
  1/2 teaspoon of salt

Put the flour on a bread-board. Make a hole in the middle of it, and
break the eggs into it. Add the water and the salt, and mix all
together with a fork until the flour is all absorbed and you have a
paste which you can roll out. Then take a rolling-pin and roll it out
very thin, about the thickness of a ten-cent piece. Leave it spread
out like this until it has dried a little. Then double it over a
number of times, always lengthwise, and cut it across in strips about
one-half inch wide. Boil two quarts of salted water, and put the
ribbons into it, and cook for ten minutes, then drain. Serve with the
meat and sauce as in receipt for Macaroni with Meat and Sauce, or with
the tomato sauce and cheese only, as desired.


RAVIOLI WITH MEAT

Prepare the paste as in the preceding receipt.

Take whatever meat is desired--chicken, turkey, or veal--this must
always be cooked. (Left-over meat may be utilized this way.) Chop the
meat very fine, add one tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese, one egg,
a dash of nutmeg, a dash of grated lemon-peel, one tablespoon of
butter, cold. Mix these ingredients in a bowl. Take a teaspoon of the
mixture and put it into the extended paste, about two inches from the
edge. Take another spoonful and put it about two inches away from the
first spoonful. Continue to do this until you have a row of
teaspoonfuls across the paste. Then fold over the edge of the paste so
as to cover the spoonfuls of mixture, and cut across the paste at the
bottom of them. Then cut into squares with the meat in the middle of
each square; press down the paste a little at the edges so the meat
cannot fall out. Continue to do this until all the meat and the paste
are used up.

Put the little squares of paste and meat into the boiling salted water
a few at a time, and boil for ten minutes. Serve with tomato sauce, or
butter and grated Parmesan cheese.


RAVIOLI WITH BRAINS

Take one lamb's brains and parboil in slightly salted water for five
minutes. Put into a bowl with a small quantity of curds, one egg, salt
and pepper, dash of nutmeg, and a little grated Parmesan cheese, and
mix all together. Then put by teaspoonfuls on the paste as in
preceding receipt. Cook for ten minutes in boiling salted water, and
serve with tomato sauce.


RAVIOLI OF CURDS AND SPINACH

  1 small bunch of spinach
  1/2 pound of curds

Cook the spinach, drain, and chop up fine, add the curds, one egg,
salt and pepper, dash of nutmeg, and a little grated cheese. Add to
the paste, and boil as before.


SWEET RAVIOLI
(_Ravioli Dolce_)

These ravioli can be used also as a dessert by preparing them as
follows:

  Take 1/2 pound of flour
  1 tablespoon of butter
  2 tablespoons of lard

Work this into a paste and roll out thin.

Take one-half pound of curds, add one egg, and the yolk of a second
egg, two tablespoons of granulated sugar, a few drops of extract of
vanilla. Mix well together and add to the paste as before. Then fry in
lard until a golden brown. Serve with powdered sugar.


TIMBALE OF MACARONI

Take a small piece of ham fat, one-half of onion, piece of celery,
parsley, small piece of carrot. Chop up fine together. Put into a
saucepan, and when the vegetables are fried add two or three mushrooms
which have been chopped fine; after five minutes add two tablespoons
of tomato paste, thinned with five tablespoons of hot water (or equal
quantity of tomato sauce without water). When the sauce is cooked take
out the mushrooms and put them on one side.

Take one-half pound of macaroni. Boil in salted water for fifteen
minutes, drain, and add the sauce described above. Add two tablespoons
Parmesan cheese, grated, and one tablespoon of butter.

Butter well a mold, then cover with a thin layer of bread crumbs the
bottom and sides. Pour into the mold one-half the macaroni, then place
on it a layer of mushrooms which you have taken out of the sauce. Now
add the other half of the macaroni, and then another thin layer of
bread crumbs. Put the mold into the oven without turning it over, and
bake in a slow oven until well browned. Then turn out and serve.

To this timbale, if desired for variety, cold meat of any kind cut up
fine may be added to the sauce; and one egg, hard boiled, and cut into
four pieces. Add the egg, and the pieces of meat which you have
removed from the sauce, to the timbale at the same time that you add
the mushrooms.



RICE TIMBALE

This timbale is made in the same way as the preceding one, only
substituting rice for macaroni. One-half cup of rice.


TIMBALE OF RIBBON MACARONI

This is prepared as the two preceding ones, using Ribbon Macaroni
instead of rice or ordinary macaroni.




RICE, ETC.


RICE WITH PEAS

  1/2 cup of rice
  Grated Parmesan cheese
  2 tablespoons of butter
  1 small onion

Chop the onion up fine and put it into the saucepan with one-half the
butter (one tablespoon). Cook until the onion is brown, then pour on
the rice (raw) and fry until the rice is dry. Then add hot water, a
ladleful at a time, taking care not to let the rice boil too hard, as
it will then become hard in the middle and floury around the edges.
When the rice is cooked, put the saucepan at the back of the stove,
and add the rest of the butter. Before taking off the stove add a
little grated Parmesan cheese and the peas, which have been prepared
as follows:

Take a small piece of ham fat, one-half small onion, and some parsley.
Chop together fine, add three tablespoons of olive-oil, salt and
pepper, and put into a saucepan on the fire. When the onion is colored
add one can of green peas (or fresh peas, according to season). When
the peas have absorbed all the olive-oil add a sufficient quantity of
broth to cover them (or water) and cook until peas are soft. Then mix
the peas with the rice, add one tablespoon of Parmesan cheese, and
serve.


RICE "ALLA ROMANA"
(_Risotto alla Romana_)

  A small piece of ham fat
  1 stalk of celery
  Parsley
  1 onion
  2 mushrooms canned, or 1 fresh mushroom
  1/3 pound of lean beef

Chop these ingredients together and put them into a large saucepan
with a small piece of butter. Cook until the meat is well browned.
Then add one tablespoon of red or white wine. Cook for a few minutes,
then add one tablespoon of tomato paste dissolved in a little hot
water, or two and one-half tablespoons of the other tomato sauce. Cook
well, adding from time to time a little water--one-half cup in all.
Wash the rice (a little less than a cupful), add it to the other
ingredients in the saucepan, and cook for about twenty minutes, until
the rice is soft, adding more water from time to time. Then add two
tablespoons of grated Parmesan cheese, mix well, and serve, with more
cheese if desired.


RISOTTO "ALLA NOSTRALE"

Take a small piece of onion, slice into small bits, and put into a
saucepan with two tablespoons of butter. Cook until onion is browned.

Wash well one-half cup of rice. Put it into the saucepan with the
onion, add salt and pepper, and fry until the rice is dry. Then take
one and one-half tablespoons of tomato paste, thinned with hot water
(or two tablespoons of other tomato sauce), and add to the rice.
Little by little add hot water until the rice is cooked through (about
one cup of hot water). Then add grated cheese, Parmesan or Gruyere,
one and one-half tablespoons of butter, and mix well over the fire,
then serve.

This rice can be served alone or with fried sausages, or with cold
chicken, or any left-over meat prepared in the following manner:

Take one and one-half tablespoons of butter in a saucepan. Cut the
cold meat into slices, and add them to the butter. Fry well, then take
one and one-half tablespoons of tomato paste, thinned in water (or
three tablespoons tomato sauce). Add to the meat a little at a time.
Simmer for one-half hour, then put into the middle of hot platter,
surrounded by rice, and pour this sauce over all. Add a handful of
grated Parmesan cheese to the rice.

This preparation of meat can be served with macaroni or corn-meal
instead of the rice.


RICE WITH BUTTER AND CHEESE
(_Riso in Bianco_)

Take one-half cup of rice. Boil in salted water. After twenty minutes
of boiling take off the fire and drain. Then put the rice back into a
saucepan with three tablespoons of grated cheese (Parmesan) and three
tablespoons of butter. Mix well and serve as an entree, or around a
plate of meat..


RICE WITH TOMATOES

Boil a cup of rice soft in hot water. Shake it now and then, but do
not stir it. Drain it, add a little milk in which a beaten egg has
been mixed, one teaspoon of butter, and a little pepper and salt.
Simmer for five minutes, and if the rice has not absorbed all the
milk, drain it again. Put the rice around a dish, smooth it into a
wall, wash it over with the yolk of a beaten egg, and put it into the
oven until firm. Take the strained juice and pulp of seven or eight
tomatoes, season with pepper, a little salt and sugar, and one-half of
a chopped-up onion; stew for twenty minutes, then stir in one
tablespoon of butter and two tablespoons of fine bread crumbs. Stew
three or four minutes to thicken, and then pour the tomatoes into the
dish, in the middle of the rice, and serve.


RICE WITH TOMATOES "ALL' INDIANA"

Wash a cup of rice and boil it. Take seven or eight good-sized
tomatoes, boil and strain them, and season with salt and a little
allspice. Take a baking-dish and put into it alternate layers of
tomato and rice, finishing off with a layer of tomato, covered up with
grated bread crumbs moistened with melted butter. Bake in a moderate
oven for a good half-hour.


RISOTTO WITH HAM

Cut into small pieces one ounce of raw ham, fat and lean. Chop up fine
a small piece of onion, and put it with the ham into a frying-pan with
one-half a tablespoon of butter. Fry slowly until the ham and onions
are golden. Then add one-half cup of uncooked rice; when it has cooked
for a few minutes, add twice its height of bouillon (or water), salt
and pepper, a dash of nutmeg, and mix well and allow it to boil for
twenty minutes over a good fire. Then take off the stove, add two
tablespoons of butter and two tablespoons of Parmesan cheese grated;
mix well and serve.


RICE WITH MUSHROOMS

  10 mushrooms if canned, or 5 or 6 if fresh ones
  3/4 of a cup of rice

Chop up a little onion, parsley, celery, and carrot together, and put
them on the fire with two tablespoons of good olive-oil. When this
sauce is colored, add two tablespoons of tomato paste, thinned with
hot water (or a corresponding quantity of tomato sauce). Season with
salt and pepper. Cut the mushrooms into small pieces, and add them to
the sauce. Cook for twenty minutes over a medium fire. Put on one
side and prepare the rice as follows:

Fry the rice with a lump of butter until dry; then add hot water, a
little at a time, and boil gently. When the rice is half cooked (after
about ten minutes) add the mushrooms and sauce, and cook for another
ten minutes. Add grated Parmesan cheese before serving.


POLENTA
(_Indian Meal_)

  3/4 of a cup of yellow Indian meal (fine)
  3 cups of water

Put the water into a granite or iron saucepan, add salt. When it
begins to boil add the Indian meal, little by little. Keep stirring
constantly as you pour it in, to prevent lumps. Boil for one-half
hour, stirring constantly over a moderate fire. If desired, a little
more water may be added if preferred not so thick. Add grated cheese
and butter.


POLENTA FRITTERS

Put one pinch of salt and one tablespoon of sugar into a cup of milk,
and put it on to boil. As soon as it boils pour in, little by little,
one-half scant cup of fine Indian meal, stirring constantly with a
wooden spoon. Allow it to boil gently for twenty minutes.

Take it off the stove, add one level tablespoon of butter and the yolk
of one egg and a little grated lemon-peel. Beat up well to mix the egg
and butter. Then turn the mixture onto the bread-board, which has been
dampened; spread it out to the thickness of a finger. Allow it to
cool, then cut into squares or diamonds or little rounds, dip these
into egg and then into the bread crumbs, and fry them in boiling lard,
a few at a time. Sprinkle with sugar, and serve hot.


POLENTA "ALLA TOSCANA"

  2 cups of Indian meal
  3 pints of cold water

Put the water on, and when it boils add salt. Then add the Indian
meal, little by little, stirring all the time. Allow it to boil over a
moderate fire for one-half hour, stirring constantly. When the meal
has become quite stiff, take a wooden spoon and dip it into hot water,
and with it detach the Indian meal from the side of the saucepan, then
hold the saucepan for a moment over the hottest part of the fire,
until the Indian meal has become detached from the bottom. Then turn
it out onto the bread-board; it should come out whole in a mold. Let
it stand a few moments to cool. Then with a wire cut it into slices
about the thickness of a finger. Place these slices on a hot platter
in a layer; pour over them a good meat gravy and grated cheese; then
put on another layer of the polenta, and add more gravy and cheese,
and so on, until your polenta is used up.


POLENTA WITH CHOPPED SAUSAGES

Prepare the Indian meal as in the preceding receipt.

Take four Deerfoot sausages (or two, if a larger variety of sausage),
remove the skins, chop fine, then fry in butter. When they are a nice
brown add one tablespoon of stock, and two tablespoons of tomato paste
thinned with hot water (or a corresponding amount of the tomato
sauce).

Cook for fifteen minutes more. Then cut the polenta in slices as in
preceding receipt and add the chopped sausages with their sauce and
grated cheese, in layers as before.


CHICKEN WITH POLENTA

Take a small chicken; clean and prepare it. Take a slice of ham fat
four fingers wide and one finger long (or one tablespoon of good
lard). Chop up very fine with a chopping knife, and put into a
good-sized saucepan. Take one-half an onion, a small carrot, a piece
of celery, and cut all into very small pieces and add them all to the
fat. Then put in the chicken, the salt, pepper, and a pinch of
allspice, and cover the saucepan. Cook until the chicken is covered,
basting with the grease, and turning the chicken until it is brown on
all sides; then add one-third of a glass of red or white wine. When
the wine has become absorbed, add one tablespoon of the tomato paste,
dissolved in a cup of hot water (or a cup of tomato sauce not too
thick). Cook for a few moments more--until the chicken is thoroughly
cooked.

Prepare the Indian meal as in receipt for Indian meal, and serve the
chicken surrounded by the Indian meal, with the sauce poured over all
and grated cheese sprinkled over the Indian meal.

Pigeon may be prepared in the same way as the chicken and served with
the Indian meal; or either one may be served instead of the Indian
meal with rice, as in receipt for Risotto alla Nostrale; Macaroni, as
in receipt for Macaroni with Butter, or Ribbon Macaroni, as in receipt
given.


POLENTA PASTICCIATA

  3/4 of a cup of Indian meal
  1 quart of milk

Boil the milk, and add the Indian meal, a little at a time, when milk
is boiling, stirring constantly. Cook for one-half an hour, stirring
constantly. Add salt just before taking off the fire. The Indian meal
should be stiff when finished. Turn it onto the bread-board, and
spread it out to the thickness of two fingers. While it is cooking
prepare a meat sauce, and a Bechamel sauce as follows:

MEAT SAUCE

Take a small piece of beef, a small piece of ham, fat and lean, one
tablespoon of butter, a small piece of onion, a small piece of carrot,
a small piece of celery, a pinch of flour, one-half cup of bouillon
(or same amount of water), pepper. Cut the meat into small dice; chop
up fine together the ham, onion, carrot, and celery. Put these all
together with some pepper into a saucepan with the butter, and when
the meat is brown, add the pinch of flour, and the bouillon a little
at a time (or the water), and cook for about one-half an hour. This
sauce should not be strained.

BECHAMEL SAUCE

Take one tablespoon of flour, and one tablespoon of butter. Put them
into a saucepan and stir with a wooden spoon until they have become a
golden-brown color. Then add, a little at a time, one pint of milk;
stir constantly until the sauce is as thick as custard, and is white
in color. If it grows too thick, a little more milk may be added; or
if it is too thin, a tiny lump of butter rolled in flour will thicken
it.

Now take the cold Indian meal and cut it into squares about two inches
across. Take a baking-dish of medium depth, butter well, then put in a
layer of squares of Indian meal close together, to entirely cover the
bottom of the dish. Sprinkle over it grated cheese; then pour on the
top enough meat sauce to cover the layer (about two tablespoons), then
on the top of this add a layer of Bechamel sauce. Then put another
layer of the squares of Indian meal, sprinkle with grated cheese as
before, add meat sauce, then Bechamel sauce, and continue in this way
until the baking-dish is full, having for the top layer the Bechamel
sauce. Put the dish into a moderate oven, and bake until it is a
golden brown on top.


POLENTA CAKE
(_Migliaccio di Farina Gialla_)

  2 cups of coarse Indian meal
  1/2 cup of raisins
  1/2 teaspoon of salt
  3 teaspoons of sugar (granulated)
  3 tablespoons of lard

Mix the salt, sugar, and raisins with the Indian meal in a bowl, then
pour in boiling water, a little at a time, and stir well with a wooden
spoon until you have a stiff paste and no dry meal remains sticking to
the bottom of the bowl.

Then take a cake-tin and grease it well with one-half of the lard.
Then turn out the Indian meal into the pan, and even it out with the
wooden spoon. Spread on the top of this the rest of the lard, softened
slightly so as you can spread it easily. Cook in a slow oven until a
golden brown. Serve hot.


GNOCCHI OF FARINA
(_Gnocchi di Semolina_)

  1 pint of milk
  1 egg
  1/2 cup of farina
  Butter and cheese

Put the milk on, and when it boils add salt. Take a wooden spoon and,
stirring constantly, add the farina little by little. Cook for ten
minutes, stirring constantly. Take off the fire and break into the
farina one egg; mix very quickly, so that the egg will not have time
to set. Spread the farina onto the breadboard about the height of a
finger. Allow it to cool, then cut it into squares or diamonds about
two or three inches across. Butter well a baking-dish, and put in the
bottom a layer of the squares of farina; sprinkle over a little grated
Parmesan cheese (or Gruyere), and put here and there a small dab of
butter. Then put in another layer of the squares of farina; add cheese
and butter as before. Continue in this way until your baking-dish is
full, having on the top layer butter and cheese.

Bake in a hot oven until a brown crust forms. Serve in the
baking-dish.


GNOCCHI OF POTATO

Take six medium-sized potatoes and put them on to boil in their
skins. When they are done, peel them and pass them through a fine
colander. Add a little salt. Take one cup of flour, and mix on the
bread-board with the potatoes until they form a paste. Roll this paste
with the hands into a sausage about the thickness of three fingers.
Cut this roll across into pieces about an inch long. Press these
pieces lightly with the finger or the handle of the knife, so they
will take little cup-shaped forms. Leave these to one side, and put
two quarts of salted water on to boil. When it boils add the gnocchi a
few at a time, until all are in the water. When the gnocchi rise to
the surface of the water, take them out with the skimmer. Put them
into a platter a few at a time, adding each time gravy and cheese, and
covering them well. Put a layer of grated cheese sprinkled on top.
Serve with meat, or as a first course.


GNOCCHI OF MILK--A DESSERT

  1 cup of milk
  1 level tablespoon of powdered starch
  2 or 3 drops of vanilla extract
  2 yolks of eggs
  2 tablespoons of sugar

Put all these ingredients together into a saucepan and mix together
with a wooden spoon for a few moments. Then put onto the back of the
stove where it is not too hot, and cook until the mixture has become
stiff. Cook a few moments longer, stirring always; then turn out onto
a bread-board and spread to a thickness of a finger and a half. When

cold, cut into diamonds or squares the width of two fingers. Butter a
baking-dish, and put the squares into it overlapping each other. Add a
few dabs of butter here and there. Put another layer of the squares in
the dish, more dabs of butter, and so on until the dish is full. Brown
in the oven.




SAUCES


ROUX FOR SAUCES

Roux is necessary to thicken and give body to sauces. Put one
tablespoon of flour and one of butter into a saucepan and cook until
the flour has lost any raw taste. Then put the saucepan on the back of
the stove and add slowly the stock or milk, one cup for every
tablespoon of butter or flour, and stir until smooth. For white sauces
take care the flour does not color; for dark sauces let it brown, but
take care it does not burn.


AGRO DOLCE SAUCE

Take two tablespoons of sugar (brown or white), one-half a cup of
currants, a quarter of a bar of grated chocolate, one tablespoon of
chopped candied orange, one of lemon-peel, one of capers, and one cup
of vinegar. Mix well together and let soak for two hours; pour it over
venison or veal, and simmer for ten minutes.


BECHAMEL SAUCE NO. 1

Put two ounces of butter and two tablespoons of flour into a saucepan
and stir for five minutes. Pour one and one-half pints of boiling milk
gradually in, beating well with a whisk. Add some nutmeg, a few
peppercorns, a pinch of salt, and some chopped mushrooms. Cook for
one-quarter of an hour, and rub through a fine sieve.


BECHAMEL SAUCE NO. 2

Mix three tablespoons of butter and three of flour to a smooth paste,
put some peppercorns, one-half an onion, one-half a carrot sliced, a
small piece of mace, two teacups of white stock, a pinch of salt and
of grated nutmeg, in a stew-pan; simmer for one-half an hour, stirring
often, then add one teacup of cream; boil at once, and strain and
serve.


TOMATO SAUCE NO. 1

Take ten fresh tomatoes, remove the skins, cut them up; put them into
a saucepan and boil them until soft. Then pass them through a sieve.
Put their juice into a saucepan with one heaping tablespoon of butter
or one-half tablespoon of good lard, salt and pepper, and boil again,
adding water if the sauce becomes too thick. This sauce can be kept in
a bottle for several days. It can be used for macaroni, etc., in place
of the tomato paste.


TOMATO SAUCE NO. 2

Mince one-quarter of an onion, one-half a stalk of celery, a few
leaves of sweet basil, and a bunch of parsley up fine. Add one-half
cup of olive-oil, a pinch of salt and one of pepper, and cut eight or
nine tomatoes into slices. Boil until the sauce is as thick as cream,
stirring occasionally, then strain through a sieve and serve.


TOMATO SAUCE NO. 3

Take four pounds of tomatoes, cut them in two, and put them into a
two-quart saucepan with two wine-glasses of water, two saltspoons of
salt, one of pepper, cover the saucepan, and boil for forty minutes,
stirring often to prevent burning; then strain. Make a roux in another
saucepan with one ounce of butter and three-quarters of an ounce of
flour. Cook for three minutes, mixing well. Take roux off the fire,
and pour the tomatoes into it a little at a time, stirring to keep it
smooth. Add two wineglasses of stock, put on the fire, and cook for
twenty minutes, stirring all the time.


BUTTER SAUCE

Take eight ounces of butter, one tablespoon of salt, one of pepper,
and two tablespoons of lemon juice. Stir with a wooden spoon over the
fire until the butter is half melted, then take it off and continue to
stir until it is quite liquid. By taking the butter off the stove
before it is all melted it will have a pleasant taste of fresh cream;
this is all lost otherwise.


LOMBARDA SAUCE

Put two tumblers of white roux and one of chicken jelly into a
saucepan, reduce, and add three yolks of eggs mixed with two ounces of
butter and the juice of one-half lemon. Before it boils take the
saucepan off the fire, and add one tumbler of thick tomato sauce (see
Sauces, page 30), strain, and just before serving add one tablespoon
of sweet herbs minced fine.


"ALLA PANNA" SAUCE

Melt one-half a pound of butter, add a little flour, salt, pepper, and
grated nutmeg. Stir until thick, then add one pint of cream, a little
chopped parsley, and heat for five minutes.


MEAT SAUCE

Put into a saucepan one pound of beef and one-half an onion chopped up
with three ounces of lard, some parsley, salt, pepper, one clove, and
a very small slice of ham. Fry these over a hot fire for a few
moments, moving them continually, and when the onion is browned add
four tablespoons of red wine, and four tablespoons of tomato sauce (or
tomato paste). When this sauce begins to sputter, add, little by
little, some boiling water. Stick a fork into the meat from time to
time to allow the juices to escape. Take a little of the sauce in a
spoon, and when it looks a good golden color, and there is a
sufficient quantity to cover the meat, put the covered saucepan at the
back of the stove and allow it to simmer until the meat is thoroughly
cooked. Then take out the meat, slice it, prepare macaroni, or any
paste you desire, and serve it with the meat, and the sauce poured
over all, and the addition of butter and grated cheese.

ECONOMICAL SAUCE

Take one-half of an old onion and chop it up fine. Take one small
carrot, wash it, scrape it, and cut it into transverse slices; do the
same with a stalk of celery, some parsley, and one fresh or canned
mushroom. Then take a slice of ham (raw if possible), fat and lean,
about four fingers wide and one finger high. Chop it up fine, and put
it into a medium-sized saucepan with one tablespoon of butter. When
the ham is colored, put in the chopped-up vegetables, one clove, salt,
and pepper, and stir constantly, allowing the vegetables to cook
thoroughly but not to burn, which will destroy the taste of the sauce.
It should be a golden color. A little red wine may be added if you
have it, but this is not necessary. Then add four fresh tomatoes, cut
into several pieces, the skins removed, and the seeds taken out. Allow
these to cook in the sauce until they sputter, then add a little water
(or bouillon if you have it), allow it to boil for a few moments more,
then take it off the fire and pass it through a sieve or fine
colander, pressing hard so that all will pass through. If it is too
thick after straining, add water or bouillon, and put it back and
allow it to boil again a few moments. This sauce can be used for
macaroni, gnocchi, left-over meat, egg, etc. The success of the sauce
depends upon the proper frying of the onion in it.


HOT PIQUANTE SAUCE

Chop up fine two ounces of lean ham and a small piece of onion, add a
little celery, the stalks of parsley, one clove, one-half tablespoon
of pepper, and one-half bay-leaf. Pour over these ingredients a scant
one-half cup of vinegar. Cover the saucepan and allow it to boil until
it has consumed one-half. Put into another saucepan one-half cup of
bouillon (or water in which you have dissolved one tablespoon of
extract of beef). Allow it to boil, and then thicken with a teaspoon
of potato flour which has been diluted in a little cold water. Drop
this, little by little, into the saucepan until you have gained the
required thickness for the sauce. Then pour in the boiled vinegar,
passing it through cheese-cloth. Mix well together and add a teaspoon
of French mustard, some capers, and some chopped-up pickles. Serve hot
with meats or tongue. The pepper should predominate in this sauce.


PIQUANTE SAUCE WITH EGG

Take some anchovy paste--one tablespoon, two tablespoons of chopped
parsley, some capers and chopped pickles, one teaspoon of French
mustard and the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs. Work this all together
into a paste, then add three tablespoons of olive-oil and two or three
of vinegar and a pinch of salt and pepper. This sauce is good with
both meat and fish.




EGGS


EGGS WITH PEAS

Take one and one-half cups of green peas, and cook them with one and
one-half tablespoons of good butter, and a pinch of salt. Take four
hard-boiled eggs, cut them in two lengthwise, and put them on a
platter; pour over them the peas as a sauce.


EGGS "ALLA MILANESE"

Hard boil four eggs, cut them in four pieces each, put them in a
platter, and pour over them the following sauce:

CREAM OF LEMON SAUCE

Take one cup of cold water, and pour one-half of it in a bowl with one
tablespoon of starch, stir well until starch is dissolved. Pour the
other one-half onto one heaping tablespoon of powered sugar and boil
for a few moments--until sugar is thoroughly dissolved. Allow it to
cool, and then add the starch, and one cup of milk, a pinch of salt, a
little grated lemon-rind, and two yolks of eggs. Mix all thoroughly,
then strain through a sieve, then put on the stove again, and over a
moderate fire, stir it constantly, always in the same direction, until
it has assumed the thickness you desire.


EGGS "ALLA SCIARMANTE"

Hard boil four eggs; cut into several pieces. Then prepare the
following:

Boil down to a syrup one heaping tablespoon of sugar, rind of
one-quarter of lemon, one scant cup of water, and a little piece of
cinnamon. Then remove the lemon-rind and the cinnamon, and add one cup
of milk or cream. When heated through, take off of fire, and add the
yolks of four eggs, beating well together. Then pour the sauce over
the hard-boiled eggs in a shallow baking-dish, put it in a very
moderate oven, and bake. Before serving squeeze on a little lemon
juice and garnish with squares of fried bread.


EGGS WITH PIQUANTE SAUCE

Chop up fine one pickled pepper, one teaspoon of capers, one-half
small pickled onion and one pickle, and some parsley. Dissolve in
boiling water one tablespoon of butter, add the juice of one-half of
lemon, a pinch of flour to give a little body, and the chopped
pickles. If too sour add some sugar.

Hard boil four eggs, cut them in four, and pour over them the sauce.


EGGS "ALLA MONACHILE"

Hard boil four eggs, divide them in half, and pour over them the
following sauce: Put two tablespoons of vinegar into a saucepan and
one tablespoon of sugar (brown or white), fifteen almonds chopped up
fine, and a small piece of candied citron. Let it boil for a little
while, then add a pinch of cinnamon, cloves, pepper, and salt, and if
too acid add a little water.

Before taking off the stove add a little flour to give body to the
sauce. Pour over the eggs and serve.


EGGS "ALLA FIORENTINA"

Hard boil four eggs. Let them cool in a bowl of cold water. Peel them
and divide them in half. Take the yolks and mix with them one heaping
tablespoon of butter, one tablespoon of Parmesan cheese grated, and a
little salt and pepper. Put this mixture into a saucepan with the
yolks of two raw eggs, and one-half of the white of one egg. Stir well
until the mixture becomes thick. Then fill the hard-boiled whites of
the eggs with the stuffing; if any stuffing remains over, spread it on
the platter under the eggs. Then put one-half cup of milk in a
saucepan with one-half tablespoon of butter and one-half tablespoon of
flour, salt, and pepper. Boil for a few moments, stirring well, then
pour over the eggs, sprinkle well with grated Parmesan cheese, and put
in the oven and brown.


LIGHTNING OMELETTE

Butter a baking-dish and put in the bottom of it slices of stale bread
(brown bread is better than white) which have been dipped in milk.
Then put in a layer of very thin slices of Gruyere cheese. Take two
eggs, beat them up to a froth, add salt and pepper, pour them into a
baking-dish on top of the bread and cheese, then put it in the oven
until it is browned on top. Serve hot.


EGGS "ALLA PIACENTINA"

Take the whites of four eggs, and beat until stiff. Then add the yolks
and one rounded tablespoon of melted butter, and a little salt and
pepper. Take a small baking-dish, butter it well, and put in the
bottom a layer or two of very thin slices of cheese, Parmesan or
Gruyere. Put into the oven for a few moments until thoroughly heated,
then pour on the whites of eggs mixed with the other ingredients, put
back in the oven, and serve when the eggs are a golden brown.


EGGS "ALLA BENEDETTINA"

Roast two small peppers, take off their skins, remove the seeds, and
cut into strips. Take two tomatoes (not too ripe), boil them, remove
the skins and seeds, and cut into thin strips also. Then wash two
anchovies, remove the bones, and cut also into strips. Take a small
baking-dish, put in the strips of peppers and tomatoes and the
anchovies. Add two tablespoons of good olive-oil and put on the top of
the stove until the ingredients boil. Then break into the dish four
eggs, taking care to keep the yolks whole. Add salt and pepper, and
put the dish into the oven until the eggs are cooked.


EGGS "ALLA ROMANA"

Beat four eggs, whites and yolks together. Add one tablespoon of milk
or cream, salt and pepper, one tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese,
and a little chopped-up parsley. With this make three or four
omelettes about the thickness of a ten-cent piece. As the omelettes
are finished lay them on a napkin to cool; then cut them transversely
into strips about one-quarter of an inch wide. Then put the strips
into a saucepan with some heated butter. Heat them through thoroughly
and serve with grated cheese and the following meat sauce poured over
them:

MEAT SAUCE

Chop up some ham fat with a little onion, celery, carrot, and parsley.
Add a small piece of beef and cook until beef is well colored. Then
add one and one-half tablespoons of red wine (or white), cook until
wine is absorbed, then add one tablespoon of tomato paste diluted with
water, or four fresh tomatoes, and boil fifteen minutes.




FISH


CODFISH "ALLA GIARDINIERA"

Take one pound of salted codfish, boil it, remove the skin and bones,
and shred it. Then take one good carrot, one-half a turnip, scrape
them, cut them into slices, and boil them for a few moments. Then
drain off the water, and put them into a saucepan with one and
one-half tablespoons of butter and finish cooking them, adding from
time to time a little boiling water. When the vegetables are cooked
add the codfish, mix well, and serve.


CODFISH WITH EGG SAUCE

Take one pound of salt codfish. Boil it and remove the skin and bones.
Then fry lightly in butter, adding chopped-up parsley, salt, and
pepper. Stir about constantly, and add from time to time a little
boiling water, until the fish is thoroughly cooked. Then beat up the
yolks of two eggs and add them with a little flour, and cook for a few
moments more. Squeeze on some lemon juice and serve.


CODFISH "ALLA MARINAIA"

Take one pound of salt codfish. Boil slightly until you can remove the
skin and bones. Chop up fine a piece of onion, and parsley, and fry
them in a saucepan with three tablespoons of best olive-oil, then put
in the codfish with salt, pepper, and a pinch of allspice. While this
is cooking, put into another saucepan three tablespoons of best
vinegar, two tablespoons of fish broth, and one-half bay-leaf. Add a
little flour to give body to the sauce, stir well, then remove the
bay-leaf, and take the saucepan off the fire. Arrange the platter with
pieces of fried bread in a layer on the bottom, then the codfish, and
then the sauce poured over it.


FRESH CODFISH "AL VINO BIANCO"

Remove the bones from three-quarters of a pound of fresh codfish. Cut
into slices lengthwise. Butter a baking-dish, put in the fish, put
more butter on top of it, salt and pepper, and one-half glass of dry
white wine. Cook for twenty minutes in a hot oven, then place the fish
on a platter, take the juice left over in the baking-dish, put it into
a saucepan, add a little flour, some more butter, and the juice of
half a lemon. Before taking off the fire, add some chopped-up parsley,
and then pour the sauce over the fish, and serve.


CODFISH WITH GREEN PEPPERS

Take one-half pound of salted codfish which has been soaked to remove
the saltiness. Remove the skin and bones, and cut the codfish into
small squares. Then dip it again into fresh water, and put the squares
onto a napkin to dry. The fish may either be left as it is, or before
proceeding, you may roll it in flour and fry it in lard or oil.

Then take two good-sized green peppers, roast them on top of the
stove, remove the skins and seeds, wash them, dry them, and cut them
in narrow strips. When this is done put three generous tablespoons of
olive-oil into a saucepan with one onion cut up small, and fry the
onion over a slow fire.

Take two big tomatoes, skin them, remove the seeds and hard parts, and
cut them into small pieces. When the onion has taken a good color, add
the tomatoes, and cook until they sputter, then add the peppers and a
little salt and pepper. If the sauce is too thick add a little water.
When the peppers are half cooked, add some chopped-up parsley and the
codfish. Cover up the saucepan and let it simmer until the fish is
cooked.

This dish is also good cold.




VEGETABLES



ONIONS "ALLA PARMEGIANA"

Take six onions. Take out the centers with an apple-corer and fill
them up with the following stuffing: One tablespoon of grated Parmesan
cheese mixed with two hard-boiled eggs and chopped parsley. Boil them
first, then roll them in flour and fry them in olive-oil or butter.
Then put them in a baking-dish with one-half tablespoon of grated
Parmesan cheese and one tablespoon of melted butter. Put them in the
oven and bake until golden.


ONIONS "ALLA VENEZIANA"

Take six small onions, remove the centers with an apple-corer. Boil
them for a few moments, drain them, and stuff them with the following:
Take a piece of bread, dip it in milk, squeeze out the milk, and mix
the bread with one tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese, the yolks of
two hard-boiled eggs. Mix well together, then add some fine-chopped
parsley, a pinch of sugar, salt and pepper, and the yolk of one raw
egg; mix again well, and then stuff the onions with the mixture. Then
dip them in flour and in egg, and fry them in lard. Put them on a
platter and serve with a piquante sauce, made as follows: Chop up fine
some pickles, capers, and pickled pepper, and add one-half cup of
water. When these are cooked, add one tablespoon of butter and cook a
little while longer, then pour over the onions and serve.


LIMA BEANS WITH HAM

Take three-quarters of a pound of lima beans, very tender young ones.
Put them in boiling water for about five minutes to whiten them. Then
put into a saucepan one heaping tablespoon of butter, some chopped
parsley, and one small onion chopped up fine. When the onion is fried,
add three ounces of raw ham, also chopped up. When the ham is fried
put in the lima beans, and a little while before they are cooked add
two or three tablespoons of stock. Serve with dice of fried bread.


FRIED SQUASH, PARSNIPS, CELERY, AND MUSHROOMS

Take two small squash, the smallest size possible; cut off the two
ends, divide them in two, and slice them in fine slices lengthwise.
Put them in an earthen dish and sprinkle well with salt. Take one
parsnip, scrape it, wash it, and boil it slightly, slice it, add it to
the squash with more salt. Take the heart of celery, boil for a
moment, and slice as with the other vegetables.  Lastly, take some
mushrooms, not very large ones, clean them, boil them a moment, and
add them to the rest. Then dry all the vegetables with a clean towel,
mix them all together, roll them thoroughly in flour, dip in egg, and
fry in hot lard, dropping them in carelessly.  Serve them in a hot
dish with a napkin under them.


PUMPKIN "ALLA PARMEGIANA"

Take a slice of pumpkin, remove the rind and the seeds, cut into
square pieces, and then slice these into slivers about the thickness
of a ten-cent piece. Boil these for a moment in salted water, drain
and put them into a saucepan, and fry in butter, with a little salt
and a pinch of allspice. Serve with grated Parmesan cheese and melted
butter. Or, if preferred, when the pumpkin is fried, put it in a
baking-dish, add thin slices of cheese (Parmesan or Gruyere), and put
it into the oven until browned.


FRIED PUMPKIN

Take a slice of pumpkin, remove the rind and the seeds. Cut it into
strips as for French fried potatoes, only finer. Roll in flour and dip
in egg, and fry in boiling lard or olive-oil.

If desired as garnishing for meat, cut the pumpkin exceedingly fine,
roll in flour, but not in egg, and fry.


SPINACH "ALLA ROMANA"

Clean and prepare the spinach. Put one pint of cold water with one
tablespoon of salt on to boil, and when it boils put in the spinach.
When the spinach is cooked--in about ten minutes--drain it in a
colander, and turn onto it the cold water from the faucet for a few
moments. Then squeeze out all the water with the hands. Put three
tablespoons of olive-oil into a frying-pan; when this is thoroughly
hot add the spinach, salt, and pepper. Cook for a few moments,
stirring well with a fork and spoon, so the oil will permeate the
spinach; then serve. Do not chop the spinach.


SPINACH SOUFFLE

Wash the spinach in several waters, put it in a covered saucepan on a
good fire. Stir now and then to prevent burning, and after fifteen
minutes add one tablespoon of salt. Cook five minutes more; drain and
squeeze out the water. Then chop up very fine. Put into a saucepan one
generous tablespoon of butter, three-quarters tablespoon of flour,
stir, and when they are half cooked, add the spinach and a little salt
and pepper. Cook for five minutes, then pour in four or five
tablespoons of cream, stirring constantly to prevent burning. Take a
cup of spinach, prepared as above, beat up the yolk of one egg, mix it
with the spinach, and stir over the fire until the egg is set; then
let it cool, and before serving stir the well-beaten whites of three
eggs lightly into it. Fill china cups or buttered papered forms half
full, put them into a hot oven for ten or fifteen minutes, and serve
at once. If too little baked or not served at once, the souffle will
be spoiled.


SPINACH "IN RICCIOLI"

Boil the spinach and pass it through a fine colander. Beat up two
eggs, add salt and pepper, and mix enough spinach into them to make
them green. Put a little olive-oil into a frying-pan, and when it is
thoroughly heated (but not boiling), pour a little of the egg, turning
the pan about so that the pancake should be as thin as a piece of
paper and dry. Toss if necessary. Take it out; repeat with the rest of
the egg. Then take the pancakes, place them one on top of the other,
and cut them into pieces the width of a finger and about two inches
long. Fry them in butter, and grate a little Parmesan cheese over
them. They make a very nice garnish.


SPINACH IN A MOLD WITH MUSHROOMS

Boil the spinach for a few moments, drain, squeeze out the water, then
pound it well, and pass it through a fine colander. Put it into a
saucepan with a lump of butter and a few drops of lemon juice. Let it
boil for a few moments, then turn it into a dish and allow it to cool.
When cold mix with it the beaten-up yolks of two eggs. Put them into a
buttered mold, leaving an empty space in the middle. Bake in a slow
oven for about an hour. When cooked turn it out onto a dish, and fill
up the empty space with mushrooms, which you have prepared as follows:
Wash and clean a sufficient quantity of mushrooms and put them into a
saucepan with a good-sized lump of butter, a little flour, salt, and
pepper. Cook over a brisk fire for ten minutes. Moisten well with
chicken broth or stock, and add some roux made as follows: Put one
tablespoon of flour and one of butter into a saucepan, and cook until
the flour has lost all raw taste. Then add stock or milk as desired,
slowly--one cup for every tablespoon of butter or flour--and stir
until smooth. Squeeze the juice of half a lemon on the mushrooms, put
them with their sauce into the spinach, and serve.


FLAN OF VEGETABLES

Wash, chop up fine, and boil several vegetables, a potato, some
spinach, a carrot, and a small beet, etc., then boil them again in a
saucepan with some stock; then add a half a cup of cream or milk, stir
well together, take them off the stove, and let them cool. When cool
add the yolks of two eggs, some grated cheese, and the whites of the
eggs beaten up. Put the vegetables into a mold which has been well
buttered and lined with bread crumbs, and cook in the oven.


LETTUCE IN THE OVEN

Take several young lettuces, wash them and remove their wilted leaves,
tie the tops together, and lay the lettuces side by side in a
baking-pan and pour in one and one-half inches of stock. Cover the
pan, and put it in a moderate oven for one-half an hour, adding stock
when necessary. Place a fork under the middle of each lettuce, raise
and drain, and lay them doubled up on a hot dish. Season the gravy in
the pan with butter, salt, and pepper, thicken with one beaten egg,
and pour it over the lettuce. Serve hot.


CUCUMBERS "ALLA TOSCANA"

Peel and blanch three or four cucumbers in boiling salted water for
five minutes. Drain and cut them into pieces one inch thick and put
them into a frying-pan with one ounce of butter, a little flour, and
one-half pint of veal broth, stir well, and add some salt and pepper.
Reduce for about fifteen minutes, stirring until it boils, add one
teaspoon of chopped parsley, one-half a teaspoon of grated nutmeg,
one-half a cup of cream, and the beaten-up yolks of two eggs. Put on
the fire again for three or four minutes. Do not let boil, and serve
hot.


CAULIFLOWER "IN STUFATO"

Remove the outer leaves and clean a fine cauliflower. Cut it into
several pieces and wash them well with cold water, put them into a pot
of boiling salted water, and cook quickly for twenty or thirty
minutes, until they are quite tender. Take them out without breaking,
and place them on pieces of buttered toast, then put some butter in a
frying-pan, add a little flour mixed with some stock, stir well until
it boils, then add several finely chopped mushrooms, and cook a little
more. Take it off the fire, and add the yolks of two eggs which have
been well beaten, salt, pepper, grated nutmeg, and the juice of one
lemon. Pour this sauce over and round the cauliflower, and serve. The
sauce must not be boiled after adding the eggs.


CELERY FRIED

Cut off the green leaves, and cut the stalks of the celery in pieces
about an inch long. Wash them and then put them into boiling water for
fifteen minutes. Then dry on a napkin. Beat up an egg with a little
stock, or hot water, add salt and pepper, dip the celery in, then roll
it in bread crumbs, and fry in boiling lard.


CELERY WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Cut off the green leaves, clean and wash the celery stalks, and then
throw them into boiling water and boil fast for twenty minutes.
Drain, dry well, put them on a dish, and pour a pint of tomato sauce,
or tomato paste diluted with hot water, over them.


TOMATOES "ALLA PIEMONTESE"

Take four rather unripe tomatoes of about the same size, put them into
boiling water and boil for a few minutes. Cut off the stem part, and
take out some of the inside with as many seeds as you can. Fill them
with boiled rice and some mushrooms chopped up small. Pour over them
the yolks of two eggs, place them in the oven to color; serve hot.


TOMATOES "ALLA SPAGNUOLA"

Take three or four large ripe tomatoes and boil them. Lay them on a
sieve to drain until wanted, and then pass them through a fine hair
sieve. Put them in a stew-pan and stir until all the liquid is
evaporated. Then add a small piece of butter and three or four raw
eggs, stirring them quickly with the tomatoes. When the eggs are
cooked, turn all out into a dish and serve hot.


TOMATOES WITH EGGS

Choose round tomatoes of about equal size and peel them. Cut off their
tops, take out their insides, and drop a raw egg into each, replacing
the top as cover. Put the tomatoes in a baking-dish and bake for about
ten minutes, until the eggs are set. Serve up in the baking-dish very
hot, with Bechamel sauce (see Sauces, page 29), or some brown gravy.


TOMATO PUDDING

Scald, peel, and slice eight tomatoes. Squeeze out three-quarters of
their juice into a bowl through cheese-cloth, and put it to one side;
then chop up the pulp of the tomatoes with two tablespoons of bread
crumbs, a little salt, sugar, and pepper, and a tablespoon of melted
butter. Pour them in a buttered mold, place the mold in a double
boiler, and put on the cover, and boil hard for one hour. Then turn
out on a dish. Meanwhile take the juice of the tomatoes, season with
sugar, salt, and pepper, mix in one tablespoon of butter rolled in
flour. Boil one minute, then pour over the pudding and serve.


STRING-BEANS "IN FRICASSEA"

Cut off the ends and string some young string-beans. Cook them in
salted water, then drain them well. Put them in a saucepan with some
butter, parsley, and chopped onion. Be careful to add occasionally
some broth if the beans dry up before they are completely cooked. Boil
slowly, and a few moments before taking them off the fire add the
yolks of one or two eggs (according to the quantity of beans) well
beaten up with a little water, the juice of a lemon, and some grated
Parmesan cheese. Stir from time to time, and never allow them to boil,
or the eggs will set. To keep the beans a good color put a pinch of
soda into the water with the salt.


STRING-BEANS WITH TOMATOES

Take some young string-beans, cut off the ends, and string them. Wash
them in cold water, drain, and while still wet put them into a
baking-dish with some good olive-oil, some chopped onion and parsley,
salt, and pepper. Put the dish on the fire with its cover on, and cook
slowly. As the beans dry add the juice of some tomatoes, or some good
tomato conserve. Take care they do not burn.


FRIED BREAD WITH RAISINS

Take some rather stale bread, cut it into slices, removing the crust.
Fry the bread in lard, and then arrange it on a platter; meanwhile
prepare the raisins as follows: Take a small saucepan and put into it
two tablespoons of good raisins, a good slice of raw ham chopped into
small pieces, and a leaf of sage, also chopped up, one tablespoon of
granulated sugar, and two tablespoons of good vinegar.  Put these
ingredients on the fire, and as soon as you have a syrup (stir
constantly) pour the raisins onto the pieces of fried bread, and the
sauce over and around them. Served with cold meat these are very nice.




MEATS


FRIED SWEETBREADS, CROQUETTES, LIVER, ETC.
(_Fritto Misto alla Romana_)

Golden Bread, Brains, Sweetbreads, Croquettes of Chicken and Veal and
Eggs, Calf's Liver and Pumpkin--all these different ingredients should
be fried each in its own manner as follows, a small quantity of each,
and served all together on one platter with slices of lemon.


GOLDEN BREAD

Choose bread which is elastic, but has no holes in it. Remove the
crust and cut it in slices about one inch thick, and from these slices
cut little pieces about three inches long and about one inch wide.
Trim them off well, so they will not be ragged or uneven. Put these
pieces into a bowl and throw on them some boiling water, then remove
them immediately and throw them into a big bowl of cold water. This
operation should be done quickly, so as to make the bread feel the
impression of heat and cold, one directly after the other. Then take
the bread between the hands and gently squeeze out the water without
breaking the pieces or deforming them. Place them on a napkin to dry.
Then dip them in egg which has been beaten up and seasoned with salt
and pepper. Allow the egg to soak well into the bread. Fifteen minutes
before serving put a frying-pan on with a quantity of lard, and as
soon as the lard is lukewarm put in the pieces of bread, turn them as
soon as they harden a little on one side. The bread must fry very
slowly, and should remain on the fire at least ten minutes, so that
the heat can penetrate gradually into the middle and make it light.
This bread to be successful should be hollow inside like a fritter
when finished. When the bread has taken a good golden color, remove
from the lard, drain it on a napkin, add a little salt, and serve very
hot.


SWEETBREADS

Parboil the sweetbreads, then cook them with one tablespoon of butter
and one tablespoon of stock. When cooked cut them into smallish
pieces, season with pepper, chopped-up parsley, and one tablespoon of
lemon, then roll them in flour; dip into egg and fry.


FRIED BRAINS

Take one lamb's brain, or one-half of a calf's brain, put it in a
saucepan with cold water, change the water from time to time for a
couple of hours, until the brains are thoroughly cleansed. Then put
them in another saucepan with fresh water, and with several pieces of
onion, a little salt, a little vinegar (one tablespoon to each brain),
and some parsley stems. As soon as the water boils, take the saucepan
off, remove the brains, and put them onto a napkin. Cut them into four
pieces, put these pieces onto a plate, and season with a little
olive-oil, some lemon juice, and chopped parsley. When you are ready
to fry, roll in flour, dip in egg, and fry the brain over a moderate
fire for seven or eight minutes in olive-oil, lard, or butter.


CALF'S LIVER FRIED

Remove the skin, and cut into slices large but thin, roll in flour,
dip in egg, and fry in boiling lard, allowing them to remain in the
frying-pan only a couple of minutes; then drain on a napkin, sprinkle
on a little salt, and serve.


POLENTA CROQUETTES

Boil one-half cup of corn-meal rather hard, and before removing from
the fire add a piece of butter and a little grated cheese and mix
well. Take it then by spoonfuls and let it fall onto a marble-top
table, or a bread-pan which has been wet a little with cold water.
These spoonfuls should form little balls about the size of a hen's
egg. On each of these croquettes place a very thin slice of Gruyere
cheese, so that the cheese will adhere to the corn-meal. Then allow
them to cool, and when cold dip into egg, then into bread crumbs, and
fry in boiling lard.


EGG CROQUETTES

Hard boil two eggs, remove the shells, dry them, and cut the eggs in
minute pieces. Put one tablespoon of butter into a saucepan, and when
it is melted add one and one-half tablespoons of flour; stir
constantly for a few moments over a slow fire with a wooden spoon,
taking care that the flour does not color. Then pour in one-third of a
cup of milk, in which you have put salt and pepper. Cool this sauce
for eight or ten minutes, stirring continually to make it smooth, then
remove from the fire, put in the chopped-up egg, some parsley chopped
fine, and one-half tablespoon of grated Parmesan cheese. When you have
mixed these ingredients well together, spread them out on a plate or
marble and allow to cool. When this has become cold and hardened, with
a wooden spoon divide it into little portions about the size of a nut.
Take these and roll them in dried bread crumbs and a little flour.
Roll them all then, one at a time, with a rotary motion, and then
elongate the balls until they are the shape of ordinary corks, then
dip the croquettes into the egg, one at a time, then into bread crumbs
again, and a few moments before serving fry in boiling lard. As soon
as they are colored remove them immediately from the lard, otherwise
they will break to pieces.

Polenta Fritters, Fried Pumpkin, Fried Squash, and Parsnips may also
be added or substituted if desired.


LITTLE FILETS "ALLA NAPOLITANA"

Butter well a frying-pan, and sprinkle over the bottom a piece of lean
ham (raw if possible) chopped up fine. Then a layer of mushrooms
chopped fine, then a layer of minced parsley. The bottom of the pan
should be entirely covered with these three ingredients. Then from a
filet of beef cut some little slices, about one-half an inch thick and
round in shape. Put these in the frying-pan, one piece near the other,
so the bottom shall be covered. Sprinkle on salt and pepper, and put
it on the fire. When the filets are cooked on one side, turn them over
on the other, but with care, so the ingredients at the bottom of the
pan will stick to the meat. When the filets are cooked on both sides,
squeeze on the juice of half a lemon, and add a little meat stock. Put
the filets on a platter, and pour over them their sauce, and serve
with croutons (fried bread).


INVOLTINI OF BEEF "ALLA SICILIANA"

Take three-quarters of a pound of beef, two ounces of ham, one
tablespoon of butter (or one-half tablespoon of lard), some bread,
some parsley, and a piece of onion. Chop up the onion fine and put it
in a saucepan with the butter (or lard). When it is colored, put in
the parsley and the ham cut up into little pieces, at the same time
add the bread cut up into three or four small dice, salt, pepper, and
a dash of nutmeg. Mix all together well. Cut the meat into six slices,
pound them to flatten out; salt slightly, and when the other
ingredients are cooked, put a portion on each slice of meat. Then roll
up the meat like sausages, put them on skewers, alternating with a
piece of fried bread of the same size. Butter well, roll in fresh
bread crumbs, and broil on the gridiron over a slow fire. These are
nice served with salad.


POLPETTONE "ALLA NAPOLITANA"

Take three-quarters of a pound of lean beef without skin or bones from
the rump-steak, flatten it out with a knife in a manner to widen it
without tearing the meat. Salt and pepper it. Then take one and
one-half ounces of ham, fat and lean, and chop it up fine with a
little piece of onion, some parsley, and some thyme, then add twice
its volume of fresh bread crumbs (which have been dipped in water and
squeezed out). When the bread has been well mixed add the yolk of one
egg and mix again well, spread this mixture all over the surface of
the beef, leveling it off with a knife. Then sprinkle on a few
raisins, and then roll up the meat like a cigar, but bigger in the
middle than at the ends. Tie it up then, crosswise and lengthwise, and
brown it in a saucepan with a little lard and some ham. As soon as it
colors add some chopped-up pieces of onion, celery, carrot, and one
clove. When these vegetables are cooked add several pieces of tomato,
and let the meat simmer for about two hours, basting it now and
then. When the meat is cooked remove the string, place the polpettone
on a platter, strain the sauce through a sieve, pour it over the meat,
and serve.


BOCCONCINI

Cut up the meat, lamb, veal, mutton, or fresh pork into pieces about
two inches wide. Sprinkle on salt and pepper and put them aside. Then
cut an equal number of pieces of bread about one-half inch thick, and
a little bit bigger then the pieces of meat. Next cut pieces of ham,
fat and lean, the same size as the pieces of meat, but double the
number. Then take a skewer (or two if one is not sufficient), and put
on it first a piece of bread, then a piece of ham, then a leaf of
sage, then one of the pieces of meat, then another leaf of sage, then
the ham, then the bread, and so on in this order, having always the
meat between two leaves of sage, two slices of ham, and two pieces of
bread. Coat everything well, and especially the bread, with olive-oil
or melted butter, and then broil them over a hot fire for a good
one-quarter of an hour, turning them constantly until they are colored
a golden brown and are crisp. If preferred, these can be cooked in the
oven. Put them on several wooden skewers, and lay them in a pan and
cook until brown and crisp. Serve with lettuce salad.


MEAT WITH RIBBON MACARONI

Take a piece of ham fat, one finger high and four fingers wide, chop
up fine with a piece of onion, piece of celery, piece of carrot, and
put into a saucepan. Take three-quarters of a pound of meat, either
lamb, veal, beef, or fresh pork, cut it into several pieces, salt and
pepper it, and put a pinch of allspice, then put it into the saucepan;
cook it until it is well colored, then add two tablespoons of red or
white wine. When it is absorbed add one tablespoon of tomato paste,
dissolved in water, or tomato sauce of fresh tomatoes (receipt Tomato
Sauce No. 1). Cook over a moderate fire, one hour longer if the meat
is veal or lamb, and one and one-half hours to two hours for pork or
beef, adding water if necessary.

This meat can be served with Ribbon Macaroni. Put the meat in the
middle, the macaroni around it, and the sauce over all, adding two
tablespoons of grated Parmesan cheese to the macaroni after it is
boiled, and mixing well before putting it on the platter. Sprinkle on
a little more cheese before carrying to the table.

This dish can be made equally well with left-over meats of any kind,
turkey being especially good served this way.




SALADS


SALAD "DEL PREVOSTO"

Boil in their skins three good-sized potatoes, peel them and slice
them, then put them into a salad bowl, and pour over them one-half a
glass of white wine. Do this about two or three hours before they are
wanted, so the potatoes will have time thoroughly to absorb the wine.
From time to time mix them with a fork and spoon to let the wine
permeate. A few minutes before the meal make a good French salad
dressing, add some pickled peppers cut up, some capers, and some
chopped-up parsley, pour on the French dressing, mix up well, and
serve.


THE CARDINAL'S SALAD

Wash a good lettuce and a bunch of water-cress. Cut a cold boiled beef
into strips, add six radishes, two hard-boiled eggs chopped up, and
one small sliced cucumber. Arrange the lettuce-leaves in a salad-bowl,
mix the other ingredients with a sufficient quantity of mayonnaise
sauce, put them in the midst of the lettuce, and serve.


ENDIVE SALAD

Take a head of endive, wash it and dry it well, and put it into a
salad-bowl. Pour over it three tablespoons of good olive-oil. Mix one
tablespoon of honey (or sugar), one of vinegar, and salt and pepper in
a cup, and pour over the salad just before serving.


ITALIAN SALAD

Cut one carrot and one turnip into slices, and cook them in boiling
soup. When cold, mix them with two cold boiled potatoes and one beet
cut into strips. Add a very little chopped leeks or onion, pour some
sauce, "Lombarda" (see Sauces, page 31), over the salad, and garnish
with water-cress.


"ALLA POLLASTRA" SALAD

Chop up six lettuce-leaves and three stalks of celery, cut up the
remains of a cold fowl in small pieces, and mix with one tablespoon of
vinegar and salt and pepper in a salad bowl. Pour a cup of mayonnaise
sauce over, and garnish with quarters of hard-boiled egg, one
tablespoon of capers, six stoned olives, and some small, tender
lettuce-leaves.


"ALLA MACEDOINE" SALAD

Cut into small pieces one cold boiled beet and half an onion. Add some
cold boiled string-beans, some cold boiled asparagus tips, two
tablespoons of cold cooked peas, one cold boiled carrot, and some
celery. Mix them together, and pour over all a mayonnaise sauce. Add
the juice of a lemon and serve.




DESSERTS


CHESTNUT FRITTERS

Take twenty good chestnuts and roast them on a slow fire so that they
won't color. Remove the shells without breaking the nuts, and put them
into a saucepan with one level tablespoon of powdered sugar and
one-half glass of milk and a little vanilla. Cover the saucepan and
let it cook slowly (simmer) for more than a half-hour. Then drain the
chestnuts and pass them through a sieve. Put them back in a bowl with
one-half a tablespoon of butter, the yolks of three eggs, and mix well
without cooking. Allow them to cool, and then take a small portion at
a time, the size of a nut, roll them, dip them in egg, and in bread
crumbs, and fry in butter and lard, a few at a time. Serve hot with
powdered sugar.


CHESTNUTS "ALLA LUCIFERO"

Take forty good chestnuts and roast them over a slow fire. Do not
allow them to become dried up or colored. Remove the shells carefully,
put them in a bowl, and pour over them one-half a glass of rum and two
or three tablespoons of powdered sugar. Set fire to the rum and baste
the chestnuts constantly as long as the rum will burn, turning the
chestnuts about so they will absorb the rum and become colored.


PEACHES WITH WINE

Take four very ripe peaches, cut them in two, take out the stones,
peel them, and cut them in thin slices. Put them in a bowl and cover
them up until wanted. Put in a saucepan one glass of red wine, two
tablespoons of powdered sugar, a piece of cinnamon, and a piece of a
rind of lemon. Boil these together, and then pour the liquid over the
peaches in the bowl while still boiling. Cover the bowl, and allow it
to stand for at least two hours. Then turn into the dish in which you
will serve the peaches and the wine.


HOT WINE

Put into the saucepan one pint of red or white wine, the first
preferred. Add two heaping tablespoons of sugar, a piece of rind of
lemon or orange, and a small stick of cinnamon. Put it onto the fire
and stir until the sugar is dissolved. When the wine boils, strain it
through some cheese-cloth and pour it into glasses, and serve hot.


MILK OF ALMOND ICE

Take one half pound of almonds. Remove the shells and skins, and put
them into a large receptacle of cold water. Add three bitter almonds
to the number. Remove them from the water, and pound them up in a
bowl, adding from time to time a little water. Then add more water and
put them into a cheese-cloth and wring it, to extract all the juices
you can. Then pound them some more, adding water, and squeeze out as
before. To the milk you have extracted from the almonds add four
tablespoons of powdered sugar and one-half tablespoon of orange water;
put into the freezer and freeze.

If desired, you can put half the quantity of almonds and the other
half of cantaloup seeds, pound together, and proceed in the same
manner. This combination is refreshing and delicious.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Simple Italian Cookery, by Antonia Isola

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIMPLE ITALIAN COOKERY ***

This file should be named 6385.txt or 6385.zip

Produced by David Starner, Karen Fabrizius
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Pride and Prejudice

Author: Jane Austen

Posting Date: August 26, 2008 [EBook #1342]
Release Date: June, 1998
Last Updated: March 10, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***




Produced by Anonymous Volunteers





PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

By Jane Austen



Chapter 1


It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property
of some one or other of their daughters.

‚ÄúMy dear Mr. Bennet,‚Äù said his lady to him one day, ‚Äúhave you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?‚Äù

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

‚ÄúBut it is,‚Äù returned she; ‚Äúfor Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
told me all about it.‚Äù

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

‚ÄúDo you not want to know who has taken it?‚Äù cried his wife impatiently.

‚Äú_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.‚Äù

This was invitation enough.

‚ÄúWhy, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he
is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to
be in the house by the end of next week.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat is his name?‚Äù

‚ÄúBingley.‚Äù

‚ÄúIs he married or single?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! Single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or
five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!‚Äù

‚ÄúHow so? How can it affect them?‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear Mr. Bennet,‚Äù replied his wife, ‚Äúhow can you be so tiresome! You
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.‚Äù

‚ÄúIs that his design in settling here?‚Äù

‚ÄúDesign! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
soon as he comes.‚Äù

‚ÄúI see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the
party.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five
grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.‚Äù

‚ÄúIn such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into
the neighbourhood.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is more than I engage for, I assure you.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to
go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no
newcomers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to
visit him if you do not.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.‚Äù

‚ÄúI desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.‚Äù

‚ÄúThey have none of them much to recommend them,‚Äù replied he; ‚Äúthey are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
quickness than her sisters.‚Äù

‚ÄúMr. Bennet, how _can_ you abuse your own children in such a way? You
take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion for my poor nerves.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They
are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration
these last twenty years at least.‚Äù

‚ÄúAh, you do not know what I suffer.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not
visit them.‚Äù

‚ÄúDepend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
all.‚Äù

Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind
was less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented,
she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her
daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.



Chapter 2


Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring
his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following
manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he
suddenly addressed her with:

‚ÄúI hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.‚Äù

‚ÄúWe are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes,‚Äù said her mother
resentfully, ‚Äúsince we are not to visit.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut you forget, mamma,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúthat we shall meet him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces
of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
of her.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo more have I,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet; ‚Äúand I am glad to find that you do
not depend on her serving you.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but, unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of her daughters.

‚ÄúDon't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake! Have a little
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.‚Äù

‚ÄúKitty has no discretion in her coughs,‚Äù said her father; ‚Äúshe times
them ill.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not cough for my own amusement,‚Äù replied Kitty fretfully. ‚ÄúWhen is
your next ball to be, Lizzy?‚Äù

‚ÄúTo-morrow fortnight.‚Äù

‚ÄúAye, so it is,‚Äù cried her mother, ‚Äúand Mrs. Long does not come back
till the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him,
for she will not know him herself.‚Äù

‚ÄúThen, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
Mr. Bingley to _her_.‚Äù

‚ÄúImpossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him
myself; how can you be so teasing?‚Äù

‚ÄúI honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is certainly
very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture somebody else will; and after all,
Mrs. Long and her neices must stand their chance; and, therefore, as
she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will
take it on myself.‚Äù

The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, ‚ÄúNonsense,
nonsense!‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?‚Äù cried he. ‚ÄúDo
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,
Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read
great books and make extracts.‚Äù

Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how.

‚ÄúWhile Mary is adjusting her ideas,‚Äù he continued, ‚Äúlet us return to Mr.
Bingley.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am sick of Mr. Bingley,‚Äù cried his wife.

‚ÄúI am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me that before? If
I had known as much this morning I certainly would not have called
on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now.‚Äù

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs.
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of joy
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
while.

‚ÄúHow good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should
persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said a
word about it till now.‚Äù

‚ÄúNow, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet; and,
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.

‚ÄúWhat an excellent father you have, girls!‚Äù said she, when the door was
shut. ‚ÄúI do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;
or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but
for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh!‚Äù said Lydia stoutly, ‚ÄúI am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I'm the tallest.‚Äù

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him to
dinner.



Chapter 3


Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways--with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been
delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained.

‚ÄúIf I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,‚Äù
 said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, ‚Äúand all the others equally well
married, I shall have nothing to wish for.‚Äù

In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat about
ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had
heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper
window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.

An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already
had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unable
to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite
disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
he might be always flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears
a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get
a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley
was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.
The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the
day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought only
six with him from London--his five sisters and a cousin. And when
the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five
altogether--Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and
another young man.

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,
with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
the report which was in general circulation within five minutes
after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he
was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
proud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all
his large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most
forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared
with his friend.

Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving
one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man
in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his
having slighted one of her daughters.

Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
standing near enough for her to hear a conversation between him and Mr.
Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press his friend
to join it.

‚ÄúCome, Darcy,‚Äù said he, ‚ÄúI must have you dance. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
dance.‚Äù

‚ÄúI certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this
it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with.‚Äù

‚ÄúI would not be so fastidious as you are,‚Äù cried Mr. Bingley, ‚Äúfor a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in
my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see
uncommonly pretty.‚Äù

‚Äú_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,‚Äù said Mr.
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.

‚ÄúOh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhich do you mean?‚Äù and turning round he looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said:
‚ÄúShe is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.‚Äù

Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
remained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the story,
however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.

The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.
Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as
her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane's
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With
a book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife's views on
the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had a
different story to hear.

‚ÄúOh! my dear Mr. Bennet,‚Äù as she entered the room, ‚Äúwe have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.
Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well
she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
her twice! Only think of _that_, my dear; he actually danced with her
twice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand
up with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
asked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King,
and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,
and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_--‚Äù

‚ÄúIf he had had any compassion for _me_,‚Äù cried her husband impatiently,
‚Äúhe would not have danced half so much! For God's sake, say no more of
his partners. Oh that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessively
handsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life saw
anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.
Hurst's gown--‚Äù

Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.

‚ÄúBut I can assure you,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúthat Lizzy does not lose much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man.‚Äù



Chapter 4


When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very
much she admired him.

‚ÄúHe is just what a young man ought to be,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúsensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much
ease, with such perfect good breeding!‚Äù

‚ÄúHe is also handsome,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, ‚Äúwhich a young man ought
likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.‚Äù

‚ÄúI was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
did not expect such a compliment.‚Äù

‚ÄúDid not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman
in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person.‚Äù

‚ÄúDear Lizzy!‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your
life.‚Äù

‚ÄúI would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think.‚Äù

‚ÄúI know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough--one meets with it
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take the
good of everybody's character and make it still better, and say nothing
of the bad--belongs to you alone. And so you like this man's sisters,
too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.‚Äù

‚ÄúCertainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in her.‚Äù

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister,
and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she
was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine
ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and
conceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of the
first private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand
pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of
associating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respect
entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were of
a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply
impressed on their memories than that their brother's fortune and their
own had been acquired by trade.

Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an
estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase.

His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own; but,
though he was now only established as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at his table--nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation
to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for
half-an-hour--was pleased with the situation and the principal
rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it
immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion.
In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were not
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually
giving offense.

The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or
prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive
to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt
acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not
conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a
collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for
none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received
either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty,
but she smiled too much.

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one
whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by such
commendation to think of her as he chose.



Chapter 5


Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.
The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a
disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town;
and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house
about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge,
where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and,
unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all
the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him
supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By
nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St.
James's had made him courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
Elizabeth's intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over
a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.

‚Äú_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet with civil
self-command to Miss Lucas. ‚Äú_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; but he seemed to like his second better.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. Robinson.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many
pretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
answering immediately to the last question: 'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'‚Äù

‚ÄúUpon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed--that does seem as
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.‚Äù

‚Äú_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,‚Äù said
Charlotte. ‚ÄúMr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
is he?--poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_.‚Äù

‚ÄúI beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.‚Äù

‚ÄúAre you quite sure, ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?‚Äù said Jane.
‚ÄúI certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.‚Äù

‚ÄúAye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry at
being spoke to.‚Äù

‚ÄúMiss Bingley told me,‚Äù said Jane, ‚Äúthat he never speaks much,
unless among his intimate acquaintances. With _them_ he is remarkably
agreeable.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to
the ball in a hack chaise.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,‚Äù said Miss Lucas, ‚Äúbut I
wish he had danced with Eliza.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnother time, Lizzy,‚Äù said her mother, ‚ÄúI would not dance with _him_,
if I were you.‚Äù

‚ÄúI believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.‚Äù

‚ÄúHis pride,‚Äù said Miss Lucas, ‚Äúdoes not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
to be proud.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is very true,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, ‚Äúand I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.‚Äù

‚ÄúPride,‚Äù observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
reflections, ‚Äúis a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may
be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,‚Äù cried a young Lucas, who came with
his sisters, ‚ÄúI should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day.‚Äù

‚ÄúThen you would drink a great deal more than you ought,‚Äù said Mrs.
Bennet; ‚Äúand if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
directly.‚Äù

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
would, and the argument ended only with the visit.



Chapter 6


The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit
was soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet's pleasing manners grew on
the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards
the two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment
of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising in
all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. It
was generally evident whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her and
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a
uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions
of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.

‚ÄúIt may perhaps be pleasant,‚Äù replied Charlotte, ‚Äúto be able to impose
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in
the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
encouragement. In nine cases out of ten a woman had better show _more_
affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he
may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I can
perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not to
discover it too.‚Äù

‚ÄúRemember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's disposition as you do.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal
it, he must find it out.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should
therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his
attention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for
falling in love as much as she chooses.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour plan is a good one,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, ‚Äúwhere nothing is in
question but the desire of being well married, and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But
these are not Jane's feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet,
she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its
reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four
dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quite
enough to make her understand his character.‚Äù

‚ÄúNot as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have also been spent together--and four
evenings may do a great deal.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they
both like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any other
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell,‚Äù said Charlotte, ‚ÄúI wish Jane success with all my heart; and
if she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a
chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a
twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the
least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
life.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.‚Äù

Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to her sister, Elizabeth
was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some
interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed her to be pretty; he had looked at her without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardly
had a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of
this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who made
himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough
to dance with.

He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so
drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party were
assembled.

‚ÄúWhat does Mr. Darcy mean,‚Äù said she to Charlotte, ‚Äúby listening to my
conversation with Colonel Forster?‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I see
what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.‚Äù

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such
a subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she
turned to him and said:

‚ÄúDid you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly
well just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at
Meryton?‚Äù

‚ÄúWith great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a lady
energetic.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are severe on us.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt will be _her_ turn soon to be teased,‚Äù said Miss Lucas. ‚ÄúI am going
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me
to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken
a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers.‚Äù On Miss Lucas's persevering, however,
she added, ‚ÄúVery well, if it must be so, it must.‚Äù And gravely glancing
at Mr. Darcy, ‚ÄúThere is a fine old saying, which everybody here is of
course familiar with: 'Keep your breath to cool your porridge'; and I
shall keep mine to swell my song.‚Äù

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that
she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
impatient for display.

Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she
had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who,
with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in
dancing at one end of the room.

Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
much engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was
his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:

‚ÄúWhat a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There
is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the first
refinements of polished society.‚Äù

‚ÄúCertainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance.‚Äù

Sir William only smiled. ‚ÄúYour friend performs delightfully,‚Äù he
continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; ‚Äúand I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do
you often dance at St. James's?‚Äù

‚ÄúNever, sir.‚Äù

‚ÄúDo you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou have a house in town, I conclude?‚Äù

Mr. Darcy bowed.

‚ÄúI had once had some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fond
of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
London would agree with Lady Lucas.‚Äù

He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed
to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
her:

‚ÄúMy dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure when so much beauty is before you.‚Äù
 And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy who, though
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William:

‚ÄúIndeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.‚Äù

Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at
all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.

‚ÄúYou excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny
me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half-hour.‚Äù

‚ÄúMr. Darcy is all politeness,‚Äù said Elizabeth, smiling.

‚ÄúHe is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza,
we cannot wonder at his complaisance--for who would object to such a
partner?‚Äù

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not
injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:

‚ÄúI can guess the subject of your reverie.‚Äù

‚ÄúI should imagine not.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings
in this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion.
I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise--the
nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What would
I give to hear your strictures on them!‚Äù

‚ÄúYour conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.‚Äù

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity:

‚ÄúMiss Elizabeth Bennet.‚Äù

‚ÄúMiss Elizabeth Bennet!‚Äù repeated Miss Bingley. ‚ÄúI am all astonishment.
How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray, when am I to wish you
joy?‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady's
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love
to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.‚Äù

‚ÄúNay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is
absolutely settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed;
and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you.‚Äù

He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to
entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her
that all was safe, her wit flowed long.



Chapter 7


Mr. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left her four thousand pounds.

She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk to
their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade.

The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and
to a milliner's shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;
their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news
the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some
from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with
news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the
neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the
headquarters.

Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the most
interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge
of the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a
secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr.
Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of
felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and
Mr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animation
to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the
regimentals of an ensign.

After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
Bennet coolly observed:

‚ÄúFrom all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two
of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but
I am now convinced.‚Äù

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter,
and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
next morning to London.

‚ÄúI am astonished, my dear,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, ‚Äúthat you should be so
ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly
of anybody's children, it should not be of my own, however.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when
I liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my
heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,
should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's in
his regimentals.‚Äù

‚ÄúMamma,‚Äù cried Lydia, ‚Äúmy aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they did when they first
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with
a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,

‚ÄúWell, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is from Miss Bingley,‚Äù said Jane, and then read it aloud.

‚ÄúMY DEAR FRIEND,--

‚ÄúIf you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me,
we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives,
for a whole day's tete-a-tete between two women can never end without a
quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and the
gentlemen are to dine with the officers.--Yours ever,

‚ÄúCAROLINE BINGLEY‚Äù

‚ÄúWith the officers!‚Äù cried Lydia. ‚ÄúI wonder my aunt did not tell us of
_that_.‚Äù

‚ÄúDining out,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, ‚Äúthat is very unlucky.‚Äù

‚ÄúCan I have the carriage?‚Äù said Jane.

‚ÄúNo, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to
rain; and then you must stay all night.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat would be a good scheme,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúif you were sure that
they would not offer to send her home.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton,
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.‚Äù

‚ÄúI had much rather go in the coach.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?‚Äù

‚ÄúThey are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut if you have got them to-day,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúmy mother's purpose
will be answered.‚Äù

She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a
bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before
it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was
delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
Jane certainly could not come back.

‚ÄúThis was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet more than
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the
next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her
contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:

‚ÄúMY DEAREST LIZZY,--

‚ÄúI find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will not
hear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr.
Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been
to me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much the
matter with me.--Yours, etc.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell, my dear,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, ‚Äúif your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she
should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little trifling
colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is
all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.‚Äù

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though
the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walking
was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.

‚ÄúHow can you be so silly,‚Äù cried her mother, ‚Äúas to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get
there.‚Äù

‚ÄúI shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.‚Äù

‚ÄúIs this a hint to me, Lizzy,‚Äù said her father, ‚Äúto send for the
horses?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing
when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.‚Äù

‚ÄúI admire the activity of your benevolence,‚Äù observed Mary, ‚Äúbut every
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.‚Äù

‚ÄúWe will go as far as Meryton with you,‚Äù said Catherine and Lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together.

‚ÄúIf we make haste,‚Äù said Lydia, as they walked along, ‚Äúperhaps we may
see something of Captain Carter before he goes.‚Äù

In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last
within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise.

She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt
for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their
brother's manners there was something better than politeness; there
was good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr.
Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the
brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as
to the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was
thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not
well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed
for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,
however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them
together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the
extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended
her.

When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and having
examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught
a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in
fact, nothing to do elsewhere.

When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present.
Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to
Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supply
of clothes.



Chapter 8


At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a very
favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could
regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his
attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the
others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.
Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to
eat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found her to prefer a plain
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.

When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were
pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;
she had no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the
same, and added:

‚ÄúShe has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent
walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really
looked almost wild.‚Äù

‚ÄúShe did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very
nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the
country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to
hide it not doing its office.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour picture may be very exact, Louisa,‚Äù said Bingley; ‚Äúbut this was
all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably
well when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite
escaped my notice.‚Äù

‚Äú_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure,‚Äù said Miss Bingley; ‚Äúand I am
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your_ sister make such
an exhibition.‚Äù

‚ÄúCertainly not.‚Äù

‚ÄúTo walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,
above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean by
it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,
a most country-town indifference to decorum.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,‚Äù said
Bingley.

‚ÄúI am afraid, Mr. Darcy,‚Äù observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, ‚Äúthat
this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.‚Äù

‚ÄúNot at all,‚Äù he replied; ‚Äúthey were brightened by the exercise.‚Äù A
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again:

‚ÄúI have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a very
sweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with
such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is
no chance of it.‚Äù

‚ÄúI think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
Meryton.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is capital,‚Äù added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.

‚ÄúIf they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside,‚Äù cried Bingley, ‚Äúit
would not make them one jot less agreeable.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world,‚Äù replied Darcy.

To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend's vulgar relations.

With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and
when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go
downstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the
excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay
below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.

‚ÄúDo you prefer reading to cards?‚Äù said he; ‚Äúthat is rather singular.‚Äù

‚ÄúMiss Eliza Bennet,‚Äù said Miss Bingley, ‚Äúdespises cards. She is a great
reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.‚Äù

‚ÄúI deserve neither such praise nor such censure,‚Äù cried Elizabeth; ‚ÄúI am
_not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.‚Äù

‚ÄúIn nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,‚Äù said Bingley; ‚Äúand
I hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well.‚Äù

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the
table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her
others--all that his library afforded.

‚ÄúAnd I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more
than I ever looked into.‚Äù

Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those
in the room.

‚ÄúI am astonished,‚Äù said Miss Bingley, ‚Äúthat my father should have left
so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!‚Äù

‚ÄúIt ought to be good,‚Äù he replied, ‚Äúit has been the work of many
generations.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying
books.‚Äù

‚ÄúI cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these.‚Äù

‚ÄúNeglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be
half as delightful as Pemberley.‚Äù

‚ÄúI wish it may.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire.‚Äù

‚ÄúWith all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am talking of possibilities, Charles.‚Äù

‚ÄúUpon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.‚Äù

Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very
little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew
near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his
eldest sister, to observe the game.

‚ÄúIs Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?‚Äù said Miss Bingley; ‚Äúwill
she be as tall as I am?‚Äù

‚ÄúI think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, or
rather taller.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me
so much. Such a countenance, such manners! And so extremely accomplished
for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is amazing to me,‚Äù said Bingley, ‚Äúhow young ladies can have patience
to be so very accomplished as they all are.‚Äù

‚ÄúAll young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and
net purses. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sure
I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being
informed that she was very accomplished.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour list of the common extent of accomplishments,‚Äù said Darcy, ‚Äúhas
too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my
acquaintance, that are really accomplished.‚Äù

‚ÄúNor I, I am sure,‚Äù said Miss Bingley.

‚ÄúThen,‚Äù observed Elizabeth, ‚Äúyou must comprehend a great deal in your
idea of an accomplished woman.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! certainly,‚Äù cried his faithful assistant, ‚Äúno one can be really
esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met
with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides
all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
will be but half-deserved.‚Äù

‚ÄúAll this she must possess,‚Äù added Darcy, ‚Äúand to all this she must
yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by
extensive reading.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.‚Äù

‚ÄúAre you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all
this?‚Äù

‚ÄúI never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe united.‚Äù

Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
room.

‚ÄúElizabeth Bennet,‚Äù said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her,
‚Äúis one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the
other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it
succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.‚Äù

‚ÄúUndoubtedly,‚Äù replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,
‚Äúthere is a meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is
despicable.‚Äù

Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
continue the subject.

Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones being sent for
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so
unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters
declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,
however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better relief
to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every
attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.



Chapter 9


Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
own judgement of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, and
its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.

Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was
not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes
that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.

‚ÄúIndeed I have, sir,‚Äù was her answer. ‚ÄúShe is a great deal too ill to be
moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass
a little longer on your kindness.‚Äù

‚ÄúRemoved!‚Äù cried Bingley. ‚ÄúIt must not be thought of. My sister, I am
sure, will not hear of her removal.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou may depend upon it, Madam,‚Äù said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
‚Äúthat Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she
remains with us.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.

‚ÄúI am sure,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúif it was not for such good friends I do not
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers
a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are
nothing to _her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a
charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the
country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it
in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhatever I do is done in a hurry,‚Äù replied he; ‚Äúand therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is exactly what I should have supposed of you,‚Äù said Elizabeth.

‚ÄúYou begin to comprehend me, do you?‚Äù cried he, turning towards her.

‚ÄúOh! yes--I understand you perfectly.‚Äù

‚ÄúI wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through I am afraid is pitiful.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricate
character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.‚Äù

‚ÄúLizzy,‚Äù cried her mother, ‚Äúremember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.‚Äù

‚ÄúI did not know before,‚Äù continued Bingley immediately, ‚Äúthat you were a
studier of character. It must be an amusing study.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at
least that advantage.‚Äù

‚ÄúThe country,‚Äù said Darcy, ‚Äúcan in general supply but a few subjects for
such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and
unvarying society.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, indeed,‚Äù cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning
a country neighbourhood. ‚ÄúI assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town.‚Äù

Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete
victory over him, continued her triumph.

‚ÄúI cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
pleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?‚Äù

‚ÄúWhen I am in the country,‚Äù he replied, ‚ÄúI never wish to leave it;
and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.‚Äù

‚ÄúAye--that is because you have the right disposition. But that
gentleman,‚Äù looking at Darcy, ‚Äúseemed to think the country was nothing
at all.‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed, Mamma, you are mistaken,‚Äù said Elizabeth, blushing for her
mother. ‚ÄúYou quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town,
which you must acknowledge to be true.‚Äù

‚ÄúCertainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting
with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.‚Äù

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towards
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her if
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.

‚ÄúYes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So
genteel and easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.‚Äù

‚ÄúDid Charlotte dine with you?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work;
_my_ daughters are brought up very differently. But everybody is to
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls,
I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I think
Charlotte so _very_ plain--but then she is our particular friend.‚Äù

‚ÄúShe seems a very pleasant young woman.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself
has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast
of my own child, but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody
better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own
partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brother
Gardiner's in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law was
sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he
did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses
on her, and very pretty they were.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd so ended his affection,‚Äù said Elizabeth impatiently. ‚ÄúThere has
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!‚Äù

‚ÄúI have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love,‚Äù said Darcy.

‚ÄúOf a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is
strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.‚Äù

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to
Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part
indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of
her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to
each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the
youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.

Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her own
easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was very
equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and
abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most
shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this
sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:

‚ÄúI am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill.‚Äù

Lydia declared herself satisfied. ‚ÄúOh! yes--it would be much better to
wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball,‚Äù she
added, ‚ÄúI shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel
Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
all Miss Bingley's witticisms on _fine eyes_.



Chapter 10


The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear.
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching
the progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.

Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual
commendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evenness
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
exactly in union with her opinion of each.

‚ÄúHow delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!‚Äù

He made no answer.

‚ÄúYou write uncommonly fast.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are mistaken. I write rather slowly.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a
year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.‚Äù

‚ÄúPray tell your sister that I long to see her.‚Äù

‚ÄúI have already told her so once, by your desire.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend
pens remarkably well.‚Äù

‚ÄúThank you--but I always mend my own.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow can you contrive to write so even?‚Äù

He was silent.

‚ÄúTell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp;
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley's.‚Äù

‚ÄúWill you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At
present I have not room to do them justice.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you
always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?‚Äù

‚ÄúThey are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me
to determine.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with
ease, cannot write ill.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,‚Äù cried her
brother, ‚Äúbecause he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much for
words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?‚Äù

‚ÄúMy style of writing is very different from yours.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh!‚Äù cried Miss Bingley, ‚ÄúCharles writes in the most careless way
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them--by which
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour humility, Mr. Bingley,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúmust disarm reproof.‚Äù

‚ÄúNothing is more deceitful,‚Äù said Darcy, ‚Äúthan the appearance of
humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
indirect boast.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?‚Äù

‚ÄúThe indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you
think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with
quickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.
Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of
panegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so very
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?‚Äù

‚ÄúNay,‚Äù cried Bingley, ‚Äúthis is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour,
I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.‚Äù

‚ÄúI dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that
you would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as
dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, 'Bingley, you had better
stay till next week,' you would probably do it, you would probably not
go--and at another word, might stay a month.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou have only proved by this,‚Äù cried Elizabeth, ‚Äúthat Mr. Bingley did
not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much
more than he did himself.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am exceedingly gratified,‚Äù said Bingley, ‚Äúby your converting what my
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such a
circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
could.‚Äù

‚ÄúWould Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentions
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?‚Äù

‚ÄúUpon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak for
himself.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,
but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to
stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering
one argument in favour of its propriety.‚Äù

‚ÄúTo yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
with you.‚Äù

‚ÄúTo yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason
one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have
supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?‚Äù

‚ÄúWill it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to
arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?‚Äù

‚ÄúBy all means,‚Äù cried Bingley; ‚Äúlet us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure
you, that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with
myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not
know a more awful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,
when he has nothing to do.‚Äù

Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.

‚ÄúI see your design, Bingley,‚Äù said his friend. ‚ÄúYou dislike an argument,
and want to silence this.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat you ask,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúis no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.
Darcy had much better finish his letter.‚Äù

Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.

When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
for an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity
to the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead
the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
seated herself.

Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed,
Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eyes were fixed
on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of
admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her
because he disliked her, was still more strange. She could only imagine,
however, at last that she drew his notice because there was something
more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in
any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked
him too little to care for his approbation.

After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by
a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said to her:

‚ÄúDo not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an
opportunity of dancing a reel?‚Äù

She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some
surprise at her silence.

‚ÄúOh!‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI heard you before, but I could not immediately
determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say 'Yes,'
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell
you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all--and now despise me if
you dare.‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed I do not dare.‚Äù

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy
had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really
believed, that were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he
should be in some danger.

Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her great
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some
assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.

She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.

‚ÄúI hope,‚Äù said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery
the next day, ‚Äúyou will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;
and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running after
officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
which your lady possesses.‚Äù

‚ÄúHave you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Phillips be placed
in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the
judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different
lines. As for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not have it taken, for
what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?‚Äù

‚ÄúIt would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be
copied.‚Äù

At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and
Elizabeth herself.

‚ÄúI did not know that you intended to walk,‚Äù said Miss Bingley, in some
confusion, lest they had been overheard.

‚ÄúYou used us abominably ill,‚Äù answered Mrs. Hurst, ‚Äúrunning away without
telling us that you were coming out.‚Äù

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk
by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,
and immediately said:

‚ÄúThis walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the
avenue.‚Äù

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
laughingly answered:

‚ÄúNo, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear
to uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a
fourth. Good-bye.‚Äù

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of
being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered
as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.



Chapter 11


When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her
sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the
drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many
professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable
as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.
Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an
entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh
at their acquaintance with spirit.

But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed
himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also
made her a slight bow, and said he was ‚Äúvery glad;‚Äù but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley's salutation. He was full of joy and
attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further from
the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone
else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
delight.

When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and
the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.
Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets
and rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss
Bennet.

Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.
Darcy's progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she
was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, ‚ÄúHow pleasant
it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no
enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a
book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
an excellent library.‚Äù

No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearing
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
towards him and said:

‚ÄúBy the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are
not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
pleasure.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf you mean Darcy,‚Äù cried her brother, ‚Äúhe may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settled
thing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall send
round my cards.‚Äù

‚ÄúI should like balls infinitely better,‚Äù she replied, ‚Äúif they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of
the day.‚Äù

‚ÄúMuch more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be
near so much like a ball.‚Äù

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked
about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but
Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In
the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and,
turning to Elizabeth, said:

‚ÄúMiss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so
long in one attitude.‚Äù

Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked
up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would
interfere. ‚ÄúWhat could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his
meaning?‚Äù--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?

‚ÄúNot at all,‚Äù was her answer; ‚Äúbut depend upon it, he means to be severe
on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing
about it.‚Äù

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in
anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his
two motives.

‚ÄúI have not the smallest objection to explaining them,‚Äù said he, as soon
as she allowed him to speak. ‚ÄúYou either choose this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other's confidence, and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be
completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! shocking!‚Äù cried Miss Bingley. ‚ÄúI never heard anything so
abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?‚Äù

‚ÄúNothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,‚Äù said Elizabeth. ‚ÄúWe
can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate
as you are, you must know how it is to be done.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut upon my honour, I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has
not yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of manner and presence of
mind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will
not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a
subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself.‚Äù

‚ÄúMr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!‚Äù cried Elizabeth. ‚ÄúThat is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintances. I dearly love a
laugh.‚Äù

‚ÄúMiss Bingley,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúhas given me more credit than can be.
The wisest and the best of men--nay, the wisest and best of their
actions--may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in
life is a joke.‚Äù

‚ÄúCertainly,‚Äù replied Elizabeth--‚Äúthere are such people, but I hope I
am not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good.
Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own,
and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely
what you are without.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study
of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
understanding to ridicule.‚Äù

‚ÄúSuch as vanity and pride.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation.‚Äù

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

‚ÄúYour examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume,‚Äù said Miss Bingley;
‚Äúand pray what is the result?‚Äù

‚ÄúI am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it
himself without disguise.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said Darcy, ‚ÄúI have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding--certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others
so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings
are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost
forever.‚Äù

‚Äú_That_ is a failing indeed!‚Äù cried Elizabeth. ‚ÄúImplacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I
really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.‚Äù

‚ÄúThere is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
evil--a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd _your_ defect is to hate everybody.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd yours,‚Äù he replied with a smile, ‚Äúis willfully to misunderstand
them.‚Äù

‚ÄúDo let us have a little music,‚Äù cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
conversation in which she had no share. ‚ÄúLouisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst?‚Äù

Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments' recollection, was not sorry for
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.



Chapter 12


In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive
them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them
very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.

The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work
on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
she felt herself to be right.

To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence--Elizabeth had been at
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked--and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teasing than usual to himself.
He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope
of influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an idea had been
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they were
at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
all, took place. Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her
to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.

They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of
its animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth.

They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human
nature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new observations of
threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information
for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been flogged, and it
had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.



Chapter 13


‚ÄúI hope, my dear,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, ‚Äúthat you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.‚Äù

‚ÄúWho do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in--and I hope _my_ dinners
are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.‚Äù

‚ÄúThe person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled. ‚ÄúA gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.
Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr.
Bingley. But--good Lord! how unlucky! There is not a bit of fish to be
got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell--I must speak to Hill this
moment.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is _not_ Mr. Bingley,‚Äù said her husband; ‚Äúit is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life.‚Äù

This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by his wife and his five daughters at once.

After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:

‚ÄúAbout a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight ago
I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring
early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead,
may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! my dear,‚Äù cried his wife, ‚ÄúI cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it.‚Äù

Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. They
had often attempted to do it before, but it was a subject on which
Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.

‚ÄúIt certainly is a most iniquitous affair,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet, ‚Äúand
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.
But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little
softened by his manner of expressing himself.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent of
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did
before him?‚Äù

‚ÄúWhy, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear.‚Äù

‚ÄúHunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15th October.

‚ÄúDear Sir,--

‚ÄúThe disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
father always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the
misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach; but
for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might
seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone
with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.--'There, Mrs.
Bennet.'--My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for having
received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be
distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de
Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has
preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be
my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her
ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which
are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I
feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in
all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I
flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable, and
that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate
will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the
offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the
means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for
it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible
amends--but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to
receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting
on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and
shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se'ennight
following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine
is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided
that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.--I
remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady and
daughters, your well-wisher and friend,

‚ÄúWILLIAM COLLINS‚Äù

‚ÄúAt four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,‚Äù
 said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. ‚ÄúHe seems to be a most
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let him come to us again.‚Äù

‚ÄúThere is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage him.‚Äù

‚ÄúThough it is difficult,‚Äù said Jane, ‚Äúto guess in what way he can mean
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
credit.‚Äù

Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
his parishioners whenever it were required.

‚ÄúHe must be an oddity, I think,‚Äù said she. ‚ÄúI cannot make him
out.--There is something very pompous in his style.--And what can he
mean by apologising for being next in the entail?--We cannot suppose he
would help it if he could.--Could he be a sensible man, sir?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him.‚Äù

‚ÄúIn point of composition,‚Äù said Mary, ‚Äúthe letter does not seem
defective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed.‚Äù

To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of her ill-will,
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband and daughters.

Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in
need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a
tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and
stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated
before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of
daughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but that in this
instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did
not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.
Bennet, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily.

‚ÄúYou are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
oddly.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.‚Äù

‚ÄúAh! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things
I know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps,
when we are better acquainted--‚Äù

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins's admiration. The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;
and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet's
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
own future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and
he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency of its
cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs. Bennet, who
assured him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a
good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He
begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared
herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a
quarter of an hour.



Chapter 14


During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady
Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for
his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him
to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect
he protested that ‚Äúhe had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in
a person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to
approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of
preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.
She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or
two, to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself--some shelves in the closet up stairs.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is all very proper and civil, I am sure,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, ‚Äúand
I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies
in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?‚Äù

‚ÄúThe garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane
from Rosings Park, her ladyship's residence.‚Äù

‚ÄúI think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?‚Äù

‚ÄúShe has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
extensive property.‚Äù

‚ÄúAh!‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, ‚Äúthen she is better off than
many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?‚Äù

‚ÄúShe is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself says
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks
the young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly
constitution, which has prevented her from making that progress in many
accomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.‚Äù

‚ÄúHas she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
court.‚Äù

‚ÄúHer indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the
British court of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleased
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable
to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that
her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most
elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by
her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
pay.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou judge very properly,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet, ‚Äúand it is happy for you
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?‚Äù

‚ÄúThey arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
give them as unstudied an air as possible.‚Äù

Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd
as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner
in his pleasure.

By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad
to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over,
glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily
assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everything
announced it to be from a circulating library), he started back, and
begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at
him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some
deliberation he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the
volume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three
pages, she interrupted him with:

‚ÄúDo you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning away
Richard; and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me
so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.‚Äù

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.
Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said:

‚ÄúI have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes
me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to
them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.‚Äù

Then turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at
backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia's
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would
resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
for backgammon.



Chapter 15


Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part
of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a
good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which
he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,
mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a
clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.

Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father's
estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own
part.

His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely face
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a
quarter of an hour's tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a
conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally
to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at
Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. ‚ÄúAs to
her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could
not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession; her
_eldest_ daughter, she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her
to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.‚Äù

Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.

Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
the day before was now high in her good graces.

Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sister
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
him after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.
Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such
doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the
house, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their
walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large book, and go.

In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes were
immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and
nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin in
a shop window, could recall them.

But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking
with another officer on the other side of the way. The officer was
the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came
to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the
stranger's air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia,
determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under
pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately
had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had
reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated
permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with
him the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a
commission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the
young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming.
His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of
beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address.
The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness
of conversation--a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and
unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together
very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy
and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the
ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and
began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and
Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to
Longbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated
it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes
on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the
stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they
looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.
Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham,
after a few moments, touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just
deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to
imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.

In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.

Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Phillip's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's
pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of
Mrs. Phillips's throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the
invitation.

Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest,
from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was
eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as
their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing
about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in the
street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to
Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility
was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of him. She
received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with
as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous
acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself,
however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who
introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such an
excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon
put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom,
however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that
Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a
lieutenant's commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the
last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr.
Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the
occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become ‚Äústupid,
disagreeable fellows.‚Äù Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses
the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillips
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured
with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.

As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either
or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain
such behaviour than her sister.

Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring
Mrs. Phillips's manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman;
for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
much attention in the whole course of his life.



Chapter 16


As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with their
aunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and
the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in
the house.

When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.
Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast
parlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much
gratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from him what
Rosings was, and who was its proprietor--when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
with the housekeeper's room.

In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and
the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive
listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as
soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the
interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.
The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking
of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.
The officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,
gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips,
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.

Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feel
that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered
interesting by the skill of the speaker.

With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the
officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young
ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind
listener in Mrs. Phillips, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly
supplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, he
had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to whist.

‚ÄúI know little of the game at present,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúbut I shall be glad
to improve myself, for in my situation in life--‚Äù Mrs. Phillips was very
glad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.

Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there
seemed danger of Lydia's engrossing him entirely, for she was a most
determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,
she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets
and exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular.
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore
at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear
him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be
told--the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not
even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly
relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in
a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.

‚ÄúAbout a month,‚Äù said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
drop, added, ‚ÄúHe is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I
understand.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes,‚Äù replied Mr. Wickham; ‚Äúhis estate there is a noble one. A clear
ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more
capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, for
I have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my
infancy.‚Äù

Elizabeth could not but look surprised.

‚ÄúYou may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting
yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?‚Äù

‚ÄúAs much as I ever wish to be,‚Äù cried Elizabeth very warmly. ‚ÄúI have
spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very
disagreeable.‚Äù

‚ÄúI have no right to give _my_ opinion,‚Äù said Wickham, ‚Äúas to his being
agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him
too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_
to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general
astonish--and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly
anywhere else. Here you are in your own family.‚Äù

‚ÄúUpon my word, I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in
the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in
Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find
him more favourably spoken of by anyone.‚Äù

‚ÄúI cannot pretend to be sorry,‚Äù said Wickham, after a short
interruption, ‚Äúthat he or that any man should not be estimated beyond
their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. The
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.‚Äù

‚ÄúI should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an
ill-tempered man.‚Äù Wickham only shook his head.

‚ÄúI wonder,‚Äù said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, ‚Äúwhether he is
likely to be in this country much longer.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when I
was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will
not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_
wishes to avoid seeing _me_, he must go. We are not on friendly terms,
and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense
of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he
is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never
be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by
a thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the
memory of his father.‚Äù

Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.

Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that
he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very
intelligible gallantry.

‚ÄúIt was the prospect of constant society, and good society,‚Äù he added,
‚Äúwhich was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I knew it to be
a most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted me
further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them.
Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and
my spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.
A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have
now made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I
was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we
were speaking of just now.‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed!‚Äù

‚ÄúYes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
elsewhere.‚Äù

‚ÄúGood heavens!‚Äù cried Elizabeth; ‚Äúbut how could _that_ be? How could his
will be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal redress?‚Äù

‚ÄúThere was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to
give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the
intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim
to it by extravagance, imprudence--in short anything or nothing. Certain
it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was
of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and
I may have spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too freely. I can
recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort
of men, and that he hates me.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.‚Äù

‚ÄúSome time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till I
can forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_.‚Äù

Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than
ever as he expressed them.

‚ÄúBut what,‚Äù said she, after a pause, ‚Äúcan have been his motive? What can
have induced him to behave so cruelly?‚Äù

‚ÄúA thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but
attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me
less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father's uncommon
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had
not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort
of preference which was often given me.‚Äù

‚ÄúI had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked
him. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to be
despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of
descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as
this.‚Äù

After a few minutes' reflection, however, she continued, ‚ÄúI _do_
remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of
his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His disposition
must be dreadful.‚Äù

‚ÄúI will not trust myself on the subject,‚Äù replied Wickham; ‚ÄúI can hardly
be just to him.‚Äù

Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, ‚ÄúTo
treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his
father!‚Äù She could have added, ‚ÄúA young man, too, like _you_, whose very
countenance may vouch for your being amiable‚Äù--but she contented herself
with, ‚Äúand one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood,
connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!‚Äù

‚ÄúWe were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest
part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips,
appears to do so much credit to--but he gave up everything to be of
use to the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of the
Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most
intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to
be under the greatest obligations to my father's active superintendence,
and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave him a
voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to
be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_, as of his affection to myself.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow strange!‚Äù cried Elizabeth. ‚ÄúHow abominable! I wonder that the very
pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no better
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest--for
dishonesty I must call it.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt _is_ wonderful,‚Äù replied Wickham, ‚Äúfor almost all his actions may
be traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It has
connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are
none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were stronger
impulses even than pride.‚Äù

‚ÄúCan such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his money
freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the
poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride--for he is very proud of what
his father was--have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family,
to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,
which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and
careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried up
as the most attentive and best of brothers.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat sort of girl is Miss Darcy?‚Äù

He shook his head. ‚ÄúI wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to
speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother--very, very
proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond
of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is
nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,
and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father's death, her
home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her
education.‚Äù

After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying:

‚ÄúI am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr. Bingley,
who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you
know Mr. Bingley?‚Äù

‚ÄúNot at all.‚Äù

‚ÄúHe is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr.
Darcy is.‚Äù

‚ÄúProbably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not
want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth
his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is
a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His
pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,
sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable--allowing something
for fortune and figure.‚Äù

The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round
the other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin
Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual inquiries as to his success were
made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every
point; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon,
he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least
importance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged
that she would not make herself uneasy.

‚ÄúI know very well, madam,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúthat when persons sit down to a
card-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily I
am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There
are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
little matters.‚Äù

Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for
a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation
was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.

‚ÄúLady Catherine de Bourgh,‚Äù she replied, ‚Äúhas very lately given him
a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her
notice, but he certainly has not known her long.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine's
connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before
yesterday.‚Äù

‚ÄúHer daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.‚Äù

This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss
Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her
affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already
self-destined for another.

‚ÄúMr. Collins,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúspeaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her
daughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship,
I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his
patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.‚Äù

‚ÄúI believe her to be both in a great degree,‚Äù replied Wickham; ‚ÄúI have
not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her
nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an
understanding of the first class.‚Äù

Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and
they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper
put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.
Wickham's attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise
of Mrs. Phillips's supper party, but his manners recommended him to
everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done
gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all
the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name
as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
fish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of Mr. and
Mrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.



Chapter 17


Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr.
Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; she
knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.
Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The
possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,
and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be
otherwise explained.

‚ÄúThey have both,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúbeen deceived, I dare say, in some way
or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
without actual blame on either side.‚Äù

‚ÄúVery true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say on
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
business? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody.‚Äù

‚ÄúLaugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light
it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father's favourite in such
a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is
impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his
character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so
excessively deceived in him? Oh! no.‚Äù

‚ÄúI can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being imposed on, than
that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me
last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it
be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his
looks.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is difficult indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what to
think.‚Äù

‚ÄúI beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.‚Äù

But Jane could think with certainty on only one point--that Mr. Bingley,
if he _had_ been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair
became public.

The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had
been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal
invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed
for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their
dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly
asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To
the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet
as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to
the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an
activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if
eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civilities.

The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered
by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a
ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.
Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy's look
and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended
less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they
each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she
had no disinclination for it.

‚ÄúWhile I can have my mornings to myself,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúit is enough--I
think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those
who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
everybody.‚Äù

Elizabeth's spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did
not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if
he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke
either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
dance.

‚ÄúI am by no means of the opinion, I assure you,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúthat a ball
of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people,
can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing
myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair
cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of
soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially,
a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
cause, and not to any disrespect for her.‚Äù

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being
engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins
instead! her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no help
for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own were perforce
delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with as
good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his
gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first
struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy
of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing
civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a
compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
was extremely agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose
to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and
till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.

If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this
time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there
was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton
once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after--the very
shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have
found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the
improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than
a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and
Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.



Chapter 18


Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in
vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a
doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty
of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that
might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than
might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose
the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy's
pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and though
this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was
pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who
told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the
day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile,
‚ÄúI do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if
he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.‚Äù

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by
Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for
Wickham's absence than if her first surmise had been just, every
feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate
disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to
the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.
Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She
was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away
with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in
speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.

But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect
of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her
spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had
not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition
to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular
notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress;
they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,
apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being
aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable
partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release from
him was ecstasy.

She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances
were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with
her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who took
her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that,
without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of
mind; Charlotte tried to console her:

‚ÄúI dare say you will find him very agreeable.‚Äù

‚ÄúHeaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find
a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an
evil.‚Äù

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a
simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant
in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and
reading in her neighbours' looks, their equal amazement in beholding
it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at
first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would
be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made
some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again
silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time
with:--‚ÄúIt is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talked
about the dance, and _you_ ought to make some sort of remark on the size
of the room, or the number of couples.‚Äù

He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be
said.

‚ÄúVery well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may
observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But
_now_ we may be silent.‚Äù

‚ÄúDo you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?‚Äù

‚ÄúSometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be
entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible.‚Äù

‚ÄúAre you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you
imagine that you are gratifying mine?‚Äù

‚ÄúBoth,‚Äù replied Elizabeth archly; ‚Äúfor I have always seen a great
similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,
taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the eclat of a proverb.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,‚Äù
 said he. ‚ÄúHow near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_
think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.‚Äù

‚ÄúI must not decide on my own performance.‚Äù

He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, ‚ÄúWhen you met us there the other day, we had just
been forming a new acquaintance.‚Äù

The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread his
features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself
for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a
constrained manner said, ‚ÄúMr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners
as may ensure his _making_ friends--whether he may be equally capable of
_retaining_ them, is less certain.‚Äù

‚ÄúHe has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship,‚Äù replied Elizabeth
with emphasis, ‚Äúand in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all
his life.‚Äù

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At
that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass
through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr.
Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on
his dancing and his partner.

‚ÄúI have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very
superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the
first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not
disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,
especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing at
her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then
flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:--but let me not interrupt you, sir. You
will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that
young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.‚Äù

The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir
William's allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his
eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and
Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,
he turned to his partner, and said, ‚ÄúSir William's interruption has made
me forget what we were talking of.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have
interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves.
We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we
are to talk of next I cannot imagine.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat think you of books?‚Äù said he, smiling.

‚ÄúBooks--oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same
feelings.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be
no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of
something else.‚Äù

‚ÄúThe _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?‚Äù said he,
with a look of doubt.

‚ÄúYes, always,‚Äù she replied, without knowing what she said, for her
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
by her suddenly exclaiming, ‚ÄúI remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,
that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was
unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being
created_.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am,‚Äù said he, with a firm voice.

‚ÄúAnd never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?‚Äù

‚ÄúI hope not.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,
to be secure of judging properly at first.‚Äù

‚ÄúMay I ask to what these questions tend?‚Äù

‚ÄúMerely to the illustration of _your_ character,‚Äù said she, endeavouring
to shake off her gravity. ‚ÄúI am trying to make it out.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd what is your success?‚Äù

She shook her head. ‚ÄúI do not get on at all. I hear such different
accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.‚Äù

‚ÄúI can readily believe,‚Äù answered he gravely, ‚Äúthat reports may vary
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
opportunity.‚Äù

‚ÄúI would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,‚Äù he coldly replied.
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree,
for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards
her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against
another.

They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, and
with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:

‚ÄúSo, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham!
Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand
questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among
his other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late
Mr. Darcy's steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to
give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy's
using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has
always been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated
Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but
I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame, that he
cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother
thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to
the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself
out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent
thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you,
Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite's guilt; but really,
considering his descent, one could not expect much better.‚Äù

‚ÄúHis guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,‚Äù said
Elizabeth angrily; ‚Äúfor I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse
than of being the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of _that_, I can
assure you, he informed me himself.‚Äù

‚ÄúI beg your pardon,‚Äù replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.
‚ÄúExcuse my interference--it was kindly meant.‚Äù

‚ÄúInsolent girl!‚Äù said Elizabeth to herself. ‚ÄúYou are much mistaken
if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.
Darcy.‚Äù She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of
such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently
marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.
Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for
Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way
before the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for happiness.

‚ÄúI want to know,‚Äù said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her
sister's, ‚Äúwhat you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have
been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case
you may be sure of my pardon.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo,‚Äù replied Jane, ‚ÄúI have not forgotten him; but I have nothing
satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of
his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,
the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that
Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has
received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister's,
Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has
been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy's regard.‚Äù

‚ÄúMr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am
satisfied. But what does he say of the living?‚Äù

‚ÄúHe does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to
him _conditionally_ only.‚Äù

‚ÄúI have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley's sincerity,‚Äù said Elizabeth warmly;
‚Äúbut you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr.
Bingley's defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of
both gentlemen as I did before.‚Äù

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with
delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr.
Bingley's regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence
in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,
and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as
to make a most important discovery.

‚ÄúI have found out,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúby a singular accident, that there is now
in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of
the house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady
Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have
thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made
in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to
do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.
I believe him to be Lady Catherine's _nephew_. It will be in my power to
assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se'nnight.‚Äù

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him
that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction
as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that
it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either
side; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in
consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her
with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she
ceased speaking, replied thus:

‚ÄúMy dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in
your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your
understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide
difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity,
and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that
I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with
the highest rank in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of
behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to
follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to
perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to
profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant
guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by
education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young
lady like yourself.‚Äù And with a low bow he left her to attack Mr.
Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose
astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced
his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of
it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the
words ‚Äúapology,‚Äù ‚ÄúHunsford,‚Äù and ‚ÄúLady Catherine de Bourgh.‚Äù It vexed
her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him
with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him time
to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however,
was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy's contempt seemed
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr.
Collins then returned to Elizabeth.

‚ÄúI have no reason, I assure you,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúto be dissatisfied with my
reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying
that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to be
certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very
handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.‚Äù

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the
train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to,
made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in
that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection
could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of
endeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughts
she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to
venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to
supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which
placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find
that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely,
openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon
be married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet
seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the
match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but
three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and
then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of
Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as
she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger
daughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of
other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be
able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that
she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was
necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on
such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.
Bennet to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. She
concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
chance of it.

In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's
words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible
whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the
chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her
mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.

‚ÄúWhat is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am
sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say
nothing _he_ may not like to hear.‚Äù

‚ÄúFor heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you
to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by
so doing!‚Äù

Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would
talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and
blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently
glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what
she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was
convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression
of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
steady gravity.

At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and
chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of
tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and
she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,
preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent
entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,
but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of
exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth's
eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her
progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very
ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks
of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to
favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.
Mary's powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was
weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at
Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to
Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs
of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,
and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, ‚ÄúThat will do
extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other
young ladies have time to exhibit.‚Äù

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and
Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father's speech, was afraid
her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.

‚ÄúIf I,‚Äù said Mr. Collins, ‚Äúwere so fortunate as to be able to sing, I
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly
compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,
to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time
to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The
rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make
such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making
as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance
that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody,
especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit
him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an
occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the
family.‚Äù And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had
been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared--many
smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his
wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly,
and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably
clever, good kind of young man.

To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or
finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he
must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should
have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough,
and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the
gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.

The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by
Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though
he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her
power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with
somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.
He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it;
that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to
her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her
the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed
her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and
good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation to herself.

She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice;
though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite
disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the
probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in
it.

The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by
a manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of
an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed
every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw a
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the
long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said
nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of ‚ÄúLord,
how tired I am!‚Äù accompanied by a violent yawn.

When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, and
addressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy he
would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without
the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure,
and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on
her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next
day for a short time.

Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of
settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly
see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four
months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thought
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.



Chapter 19


The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his
declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at
the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On
finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together,
soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:

‚ÄúMay I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the
course of this morning?‚Äù

Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.
Bennet answered instantly, ‚ÄúOh dear!--yes--certainly. I am sure Lizzy
will be very happy--I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I
want you up stairs.‚Äù And, gathering her work together, she was hastening
away, when Elizabeth called out:

‚ÄúDear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse
me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am
going away myself.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.‚Äù And upon
Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to
escape, she added: ‚ÄúLizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing Mr.
Collins.‚Äù

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction--and a moment's
consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to
conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between
distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as
they were gone, Mr. Collins began.

‚ÄúBelieve me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected
mother's permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the
purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as
soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of
my future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons for
marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design
of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.‚Äù

The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away
with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could
not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further,
and he continued:

‚ÄúMy reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it will
add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly--which perhaps I ought
to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling
patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I
left Hunsford--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was
arranging Miss de Bourgh's footstool, that she said, 'Mr. Collins, you
must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose
a gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_, let her be an active,
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice
and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond
anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and
respect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I
can assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy
myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that
the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy
event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not
be for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and
I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
in the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother's
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that
no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.‚Äù

It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.

‚ÄúYou are too hasty, sir,‚Äù she cried. ‚ÄúYou forget that I have made no
answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to
decline them.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am not now to learn,‚Äù replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
hand, ‚Äúthat it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even a
third time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just
said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.‚Äù

‚ÄúUpon my word, sir,‚Äù cried Elizabeth, ‚Äúyour hope is a rather
extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
could make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
situation.‚Äù

‚ÄúWere it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,‚Äù said Mr. Collins
very gravely--‚Äúbut I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all
disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of
seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your
modesty, economy, and other amiable qualification.‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You
must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment
of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may
be considered, therefore, as finally settled.‚Äù And rising as she
thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus
addressed her:

‚ÄúWhen I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I
shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given
me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on
the first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
female character.‚Äù

‚ÄúReally, Mr. Collins,‚Äù cried Elizabeth with some warmth, ‚Äúyou puzzle me
exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as
to convince you of its being one.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
refusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My reasons for
believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand is
unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would
be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections
with the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are
circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further
consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no
means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Your
portion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undo
the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must
therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me,
I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind
of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect
forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant
female, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking
the truth from her heart.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are uniformly charming!‚Äù cried he, with an air of awkward
gallantry; ‚Äúand I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable.‚Äù

To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make
no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if
he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.



Chapter 20


Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open
the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.

This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have been
glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage
him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,
and could not help saying so.

‚ÄúBut, depend upon it, Mr. Collins,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúthat Lizzy shall be
brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a very
headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will
_make_ her know it.‚Äù

‚ÄúPardon me for interrupting you, madam,‚Äù cried Mr. Collins; ‚Äúbut if
she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she
actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not
to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of
temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.‚Äù

‚ÄúSir, you quite misunderstand me,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. ‚ÄúLizzy is
only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as
good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.‚Äù

She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her
husband, called out as she entered the library, ‚ÄúOh! Mr. Bennet, you
are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make
Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if you
do not make haste he will change his mind and not have _her_.‚Äù

Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by
her communication.

‚ÄúI have not the pleasure of understanding you,‚Äù said he, when she had
finished her speech. ‚ÄúOf what are you talking?‚Äù

‚ÄúOf Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.‚Äù

‚ÄúSpeak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her
marrying him.‚Äù

‚ÄúLet her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
library.

‚ÄúCome here, child,‚Äù cried her father as she appeared. ‚ÄúI have sent for
you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made
you an offer of marriage. Is it true?‚Äù Elizabeth replied that it was.
‚ÄúVery well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?‚Äù

‚ÄúI have, sir.‚Äù

‚ÄúVery well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your
accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, or I will never see her again.‚Äù

‚ÄúAn unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must
be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
if you _do_.‚Äù

Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning,
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.

‚ÄúWhat do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised me to
_insist_ upon her marrying him.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear,‚Äù replied her husband, ‚ÄúI have two small favours to request.
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
library to myself as soon as may be.‚Äù

Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane
in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined
interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and
sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner
varied, however, her determination never did.

Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives his cousin
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.

While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
her, cried in a half whisper, ‚ÄúI am glad you are come, for there is such
fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.‚Äù

Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,
who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the
breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her
family. ‚ÄúPray do, my dear Miss Lucas,‚Äù she added in a melancholy tone,
‚Äúfor nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used,
nobody feels for my poor nerves.‚Äù

Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.

‚ÄúAye, there she comes,‚Äù continued Mrs. Bennet, ‚Äúlooking as unconcerned
as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided
she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy--if you take it
into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
to maintain you when your father is dead. I shall not be able to keep
you--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told
you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,
and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking
to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking
to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have
no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it
is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.‚Äù

Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that
any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase the
irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of
them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with
an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to
the girls, ‚ÄúNow, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold
your tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversation
together.‚Äù

Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projected
conversation: ‚ÄúOh! Mr. Collins!‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear madam,‚Äù replied he, ‚Äúlet us be for ever silent on this point.
Far be it from me,‚Äù he presently continued, in a voice that marked his
displeasure, ‚Äúto resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation
to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a
young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment;
and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt
of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand;
for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as
when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our
estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect
to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to
your daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my
behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my
dismission from your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are all
liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise.‚Äù



Chapter 21


The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of her
mother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly
expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her,
but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke
to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and
especially to her friend.

The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill-humour or ill
health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth
had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on
Saturday, and to Saturday he meant to stay.

After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.
He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their
aunt's where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, was
well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged
that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.

‚ÄúI found,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúas the time drew near that I had better not meet
Mr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
might arise unpleasant to more than myself.‚Äù

She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to
her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the
compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.

Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
from Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little,
hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair, flowing hand; and
Elizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as she read it, and saw
her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected
herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usual
cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety
on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no
sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane
invited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their own room,
Jane, taking out the letter, said:

‚ÄúThis is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a good
deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on
their way to town--and without any intention of coming back again. You
shall hear what she says.‚Äù

She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a
house. The next was in these words: ‚ÄúI do not pretend to regret anything
I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend;
but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that
delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may
lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved
correspondence. I depend on you for that.‚Äù To these highflown
expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust;
and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw
nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to
regard it, in the enjoyment of his.

‚ÄúIt is unlucky,‚Äù said she, after a short pause, ‚Äúthat you should not be
able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not
hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks
forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater
satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by
them.‚Äù

‚ÄúCaroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:‚Äù

‚ÄúWhen my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which
took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend
his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are
already there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my
dearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd--but of
that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may
abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your
beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the
three of whom we shall deprive you.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is evident by this,‚Äù added Jane, ‚Äúthat he comes back no more this
winter.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he _should_.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhy will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own
master. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which
particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_.‚Äù

‚ÄúMr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth,
_we_ are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think
Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments;
and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into
something still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of
her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before
mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave the
country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have
frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing;
her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister's
partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most
capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances to
favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
of so many?‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat do you think of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?‚Äù said Jane as she
finished it. ‚ÄúIs it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare that
Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is
perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if she
suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to
put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?‚Äù

‚ÄúMost willingly.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is
in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him
to town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
does not care about you.‚Äù

Jane shook her head.

‚ÄúIndeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you
together can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. She
is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr.
Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the
case is this: We are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she
is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion
that when there has been _one_ intermarriage, she may have less trouble
in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and
I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,
my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley
tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest
degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on
Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead
of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf we thought alike of Miss Bingley,‚Äù replied Jane, ‚Äúyour
representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the
foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving
anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving
herself.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you
will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means.
You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry
elsewhere?‚Äù

‚ÄúYou must decide for yourself,‚Äù said Elizabeth; ‚Äúand if, upon mature
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by
all means to refuse him.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow can you talk so?‚Äù said Jane, faintly smiling. ‚ÄúYou must know that
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
not hesitate.‚Äù

‚ÄúI did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider
your situation with much compassion.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
required. A thousand things may arise in six months!‚Äù

The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline's
interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those
wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man
so totally independent of everyone.

She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt
on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope,
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.

They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct;
but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After
lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Mr.
Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the
conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had
been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two
full courses.



Chapter 22


The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the
chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.
Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. ‚ÄúIt keeps him in good
humour,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúand I am more obliged to you than I can express.‚Äù
 Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was
very amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
had any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her
from any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towards
herself. Such was Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were so
favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost
secure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very
soon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
character, for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,
from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
till its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday.
His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas
perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and
instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had
she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.

In as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speeches would allow,
everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as
they entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name the day that
was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must
be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with
his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must
guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure
and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that
establishment were gained.

Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more
interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer
Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided
opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the
Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife
should make their appearance at St. James's. The whole family, in short,
were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes
of _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have
done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte's
dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had
gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were
in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible
nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must
be imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highly
either of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it was
the only provision for well-educated young women of small fortune,
and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest
preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at
the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all
the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business
was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship
she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder,
and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be
shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved
to give her the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins,
when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very
dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the
curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct
questions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
publish his prosperous love.

As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the
family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved
for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality,
said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, whenever
his engagements might allow him to visit them.

‚ÄúMy dear madam,‚Äù he replied, ‚Äúthis invitation is particularly
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and
you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as
possible.‚Äù

They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
so speedy a return, immediately said:

‚ÄúBut is there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, my
good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of
offending your patroness.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear sir,‚Äù replied Mr. Collins, ‚ÄúI am particularly obliged to you
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
material a step without her ladyship's concurrence.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.‚Äù

‚ÄúBelieve me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive
from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your
regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, though
my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now
take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my
cousin Elizabeth.‚Äù

With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
surprised that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to
understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her
younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.
She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there was
a solidity in his reflections which often struck her, and though by no
means so clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to read
and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very
agreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of this
kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.

The possibility of Mr. Collins's fancying himself in love with her
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but
that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from
possibility as she could encourage him herself, and her astonishment was
consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and
she could not help crying out:

‚ÄúEngaged to Mr. Collins! My dear Charlotte--impossible!‚Äù

The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her
story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a
reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained
her composure, and calmly replied:

‚ÄúWhy should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible
that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion,
because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?‚Äù

But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort
for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of
their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her
all imaginable happiness.

‚ÄúI see what you are feeling,‚Äù replied Charlotte. ‚ÄúYou must be surprised,
very much surprised--so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry
you. But when you have had time to think it over, I hope you will be
satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I never
was. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins's
character, connection, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on
entering the marriage state.‚Äù

Elizabeth quietly answered ‚ÄúUndoubtedly;‚Äù and after an awkward pause,
they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much
longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard.
It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so
unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins's making two offers
of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now
accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony was
not exactly like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possible
that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better
feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins was a
most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herself
and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it
was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had
chosen.



Chapter 23


Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention
it, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, to
announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, he unfolded the matter--to an audience not merely wondering, but
incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness,
protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and
often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:

‚ÄúGood Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know
that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?‚Äù

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
without anger such treatment; but Sir William's good breeding carried
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the
most forbearing courtesy.

Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant
a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by
mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.

Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while
Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings
found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins
had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be
happy together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she
herself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these two
points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
console and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out her
resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without
scolding her, a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William
or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she
could at all forgive their daughter.

Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for
it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and
more foolish than his daughter!

Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she said
less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;
nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty
and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
to spread at Meryton.

Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort
on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,
though Mrs. Bennet's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
enough to drive happiness away.

Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that
no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her
disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could
never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious,
as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of his
return.

Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised
letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to
their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
twelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging
his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many
rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection
of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was
merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready
to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither
he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine,
he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to take
place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable
argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making him
the happiest of men.

Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to
complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come
to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient
and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and
they gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley's continued
absence.

Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the
report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.
Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
falsehood.

Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that
his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as
she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so
dishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its
frequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London might be too much, she feared, for
the strength of his attachment.

As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more
painful than Elizabeth's, but whatever she felt she was desirous of
concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother,
an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her
impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he
did not come back she would think herself very ill used. It needed
all Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
tranquillity.

Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his
reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his
first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;
and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by
him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.

Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour,
and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight
of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she
regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see
them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. She
complained bitterly of all this to her husband.

‚ÄúIndeed, Mr. Bennet,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúit is very hard to think that Charlotte
Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced to
make way for _her_, and live to see her take her place in it!‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for
better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor.‚Äù

This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead of
making any answer, she went on as before.

‚ÄúI cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was
not for the entail, I should not mind it.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat should not you mind?‚Äù

‚ÄúI should not mind anything at all.‚Äù

‚ÄúLet us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
insensibility.‚Äù

‚ÄúI never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How
anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's own
daughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too!
Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?‚Äù

‚ÄúI leave it to yourself to determine,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet.



Chapter 24


Miss Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for
the winter, and concluded with her brother's regret at not having had
time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left
the country.

Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest
of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the
writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupied
the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former
letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother's being an
inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of
the latter with regard to new furniture.

Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,
heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern
for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline's
assertion of her brother's being partial to Miss Darcy she paid no
credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she
had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she
could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness
of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave
of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happiness
to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however,
been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in
whatever manner he thought best, but her sister's was involved in it, as
she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short,
on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She
could think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley's regard had really
died away, or were suppressed by his friends' interference; whether
he had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped his
observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be
materially affected by the difference, her sister's situation remained
the same, her peace equally wounded.

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to
Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet's leaving them together, after a
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
not help saying:

‚ÄúOh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have no
idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But
I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall
all be as we were before.‚Äù

Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said
nothing.

‚ÄúYou doubt me,‚Äù cried Jane, slightly colouring; ‚Äúindeed, you have
no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear,
and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not _that_ pain. A
little time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better.‚Äù

With a stronger voice she soon added, ‚ÄúI have this comfort immediately,
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it
has done no harm to anyone but myself.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear Jane!‚Äù exclaimed Elizabeth, ‚Äúyou are too good. Your sweetness
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say
to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you
deserve.‚Äù

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back
the praise on her sister's warm affection.

‚ÄúNay,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúthis is not fair. _You_ wish to think all the
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want
to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not
be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your
privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see
of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or
sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the
other is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it is
unaccountable!‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will
ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference
of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and
Charlotte's steady, prudent character. Remember that she is one of a
large family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and be
ready to believe, for everybody's sake, that she may feel something like
regard and esteem for our cousin.‚Äù

‚ÄúTo oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else
could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that
Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her
understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a
conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as
I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who married him
cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though
it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,
change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of
danger security for happiness.‚Äù

‚ÄúI must think your language too strong in speaking of both,‚Äù replied
Jane; ‚Äúand I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happy
together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You
mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and
saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy
ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man
to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but
our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than
it does.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd men take care that they should.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley's conduct to design,‚Äù
 said Elizabeth; ‚Äúbut without scheming to do wrong, or to make others
unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution,
will do the business.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd do you impute it to either of those?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what
I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, in conjunction with his friend.‚Äù

‚ÄúI cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can
only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman can
secure it.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour first position is false. They may wish many things besides his
happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
connections, and pride.‚Äù

‚ÄúBeyond a doubt, they _do_ wish him to choose Miss Darcy,‚Äù replied Jane;
‚Äúbut this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have
known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love
her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely
they should have opposed their brother's. What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very
objectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not try
to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an
affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been
mistaken--or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of what
I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in
the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.‚Äù

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.

Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no
more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account
for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with
less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she
did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the
effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her
no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at
the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet's best
comfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.

Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. ‚ÄúSo, Lizzy,‚Äù said he one day,
‚Äúyour sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next to
being married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then.
It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinction
among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to
be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough in
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham
be _your_ man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.‚Äù

‚ÄúThank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not
all expect Jane's good fortune.‚Äù

‚ÄúTrue,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet, ‚Äúbut it is a comfort to think that whatever of
that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make
the most of it.‚Äù

Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn
family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now
added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already
heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was
pleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they
had known anything of the matter.

Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be
any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society
of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody else
Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.



Chapter 25


After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity,
Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his
side, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as he had reason
to hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day would
be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of his
relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his fair
cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father another
letter of thanks.

On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving
her brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmas
at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly
superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield
ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived
by trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so
well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger
than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the
two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard.
They had frequently been staying with her in town.

The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on her arrival was to
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was
done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.
Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They
had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her
girls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there was
nothing in it.

‚ÄúI do not blame Jane,‚Äù she continued, ‚Äúfor Jane would have got Mr.
Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to think
that she might have been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had it not
been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,
and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
a daughter married before I have, and that the Longbourn estate is just
as much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed,
sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of
them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of
long sleeves.‚Äù

Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before,
in the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with her, made her
sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
conversation.

When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. ‚ÄúIt
seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,‚Äù said she. ‚ÄúI am
sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such
as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl
for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets
her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.‚Äù

‚ÄúAn excellent consolation in its way,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúbut it will not
do for _us_. We do not suffer by _accident_. It does not often
happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in
love with only a few days before.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut that expression of 'violently in love' is so hackneyed, so
doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as
often applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour's acquaintance,
as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_ Mr. Bingley's
love?‚Äù

‚ÄúI never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he
offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance; and I
spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be
finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, yes!--of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor
Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get
over it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she
would be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be
of service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as
anything.‚Äù

Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
of her sister's ready acquiescence.

‚ÄúI hope,‚Äù added Mrs. Gardiner, ‚Äúthat no consideration with regard to
this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all,
unless he really comes to see her.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such
a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may
perhaps have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he
would hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleanse him from its
impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley
never stirs without him.‚Äù

‚ÄúSo much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane
correspond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling.‚Äù

‚ÄúShe will drop the acquaintance entirely.‚Äù

But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's being
withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which
convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that
his affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane's
attractions.

Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the
Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as she
hoped by Caroline's not living in the same house with her brother,
she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of
seeing him.

The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
made part of it--of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
on these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's
warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them,
from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and
she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
an attachment.

To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,
before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very
part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many
acquaintances in common; and though Wickham had been little there since
the death of Darcy's father, it was yet in his power to give her fresher
intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of
procuring.

Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject
of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute
description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of
praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both
him and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy's
treatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman's
reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and
was confident at last that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam
Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.



Chapter 26


Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given
on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after
honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:

‚ÄúYou are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because
you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve
yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want
of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against
_him_; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he
ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, you
must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all
expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of
myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I
can prevent it.‚Äù

‚ÄúElizabeth, you are not serious now.‚Äù

‚ÄúI beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love with
Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison,
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to
me--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence
of it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father's opinion of me does
me the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but
since we see every day that where there is affection, young people
are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many
of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it
would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is not
to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first
object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short,
I will do my best.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very
often. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.‚Äù

‚ÄúAs I did the other day,‚Äù said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: ‚Äúvery
true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imagine
that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been
so frequently invited this week. You know my mother's ideas as to the
necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope
you are satisfied.‚Äù

Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for
the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice
being given on such a point, without being resented.

Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted
by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases,
his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage was
now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think
it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that
she ‚Äú_wished_ they might be happy.‚Äù Thursday was to be the wedding day,
and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she
rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and
reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her
out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:

‚ÄúI shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.‚Äù

‚Äú_That_ you certainly shall.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?‚Äù

‚ÄúWe shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to
come to Hunsford.‚Äù

Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the
visit.

‚ÄúMy father and Maria are coming to me in March,‚Äù added Charlotte, ‚Äúand I
hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as
welcome as either of them.‚Äù

The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to hear, on
the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that
it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never
address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over,
and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
sake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters
were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be
curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte
expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing
which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most
friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
for her own visit there to know the rest.

Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their
safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it
would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.

Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience
generally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or
hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that
her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been
lost.

‚ÄúMy aunt,‚Äù she continued, ‚Äúis going to-morrow into that part of the
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.‚Äù

She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.
‚ÄúI did not think Caroline in spirits,‚Äù were her words, ‚Äúbut she was very
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming
to London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached
her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much
engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that
Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit was
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall
see them soon here.‚Äù

Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that
accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister's being in town.

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to
persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be
blind to Miss Bingley's inattention. After waiting at home every morning
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more,
the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no
longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will
prove what she felt.

‚ÄúMy dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her
better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have been
entirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me. But, my dear sister,
though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I
still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was
as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for
wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to
happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not
return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I
receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that
she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not
calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was
in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was
perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity,
though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me out
as she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on
her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting
wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the
cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though _we_ know
this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily
account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to
his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural and
amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now,
because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met, long ago.
He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she said
herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she
wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I
cannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should
be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity
in all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought,
and think only of what will make me happy--your affection, and the
invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very
soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield
again, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty. We had better
not mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts
from our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and
Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.--Yours, etc.‚Äù

This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not
even wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on
every review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible
advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr.
Darcy's sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make him abundantly
regret what he had thrown away.

Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth
had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to
herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,
he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to
see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.
Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied
with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune
permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than
in Charlotte's, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.
Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to
suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very
sincerely wish him happy.

All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the
circumstances, she thus went on: ‚ÄúI am now convinced, my dear aunt, that
I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pure
and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and
wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial
towards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to
think her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a more
interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in love
with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take
his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the
ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain.‚Äù



Chapter 27


With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take
Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of
going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan
and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure
as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing
Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There
was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her
a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,
and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch. She was
to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement
of spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became
perfect as plan could be.

The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.

The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of
what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there
was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to
him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that,
whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable
and pleasing.

Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her
think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a
good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say
that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much
delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but
she had known Sir William's too long. He could tell her nothing new of
the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
worn out, like his information.

It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when
they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and
lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen
her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her
sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her
spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however,
to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the
particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, and
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the
acquaintance.

Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, and
complimented her on bearing it so well.

‚ÄúBut my dear Elizabeth,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúwhat sort of girl is Miss King? I
should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.‚Äù

‚ÄúPray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,
and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get
a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is
mercenary.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
what to think.‚Äù

‚ÄúShe is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather's death
made her mistress of this fortune.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_
affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally
poor?‚Äù

‚ÄúBut there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her
so soon after this event.‚Äù

‚ÄúA man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant
decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,
why should _we_?‚Äù

‚Äú_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her being
deficient in something herself--sense or feeling.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell,‚Äù cried Elizabeth, ‚Äúhave it as you choose. _He_ shall be
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,
to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrow
where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones
worth knowing, after all.‚Äù

‚ÄúTake care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.‚Äù

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.

‚ÄúWe have not determined how far it shall carry us,‚Äù said Mrs. Gardiner,
‚Äúbut, perhaps, to the Lakes.‚Äù

No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. ‚ÄúOh, my dear,
dear aunt,‚Äù she rapturously cried, ‚Äúwhat delight! what felicity! You
give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What
are young men to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transport
we shall spend! And when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other
travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We
_will_ know where we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen.
Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our
imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene,
will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let _our_
first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of
travellers.‚Äù



Chapter 28


Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to
Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had
seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.

When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth
smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.

At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the
road, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the laurel hedge,
everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate which
led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of
the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing
at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the
liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with
coming when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw
instantly that her cousin's manners were not altered by his marriage;
his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some
minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her
family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they
were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious
formality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife's
offers of refreshment.

Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help
in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its
aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her,
as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But
though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to
gratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder at
her friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion.
When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be
ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned her
eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but
in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to
admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to
the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had
happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the
garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of
which he attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his most
respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance
with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and
owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way
through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out
with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the
fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which
the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the
prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered
the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome
modern building, well situated on rising ground.

From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;
but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband's
help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything
was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be
forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by
Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often
forgotten.

She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining
in, observed:

‚ÄúYes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I
doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice
when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she
will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she
honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is
charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed
to walk home. Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I
_should_ say, one of her ladyship's carriages, for she has several.‚Äù

‚ÄúLady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed,‚Äù added
Charlotte, ‚Äúand a most attentive neighbour.‚Äù

‚ÄúVery true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of
woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.‚Äù

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news,
and telling again what had already been written; and when it closed,
Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon
Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it
was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit
would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with
Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.

About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in
confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running
up stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened
the door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with
agitation, cried out--

‚ÄúOh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make
haste, and come down this moment.‚Äù

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more,
and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in
quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the
garden gate.

‚ÄúAnd is this all?‚Äù cried Elizabeth. ‚ÄúI expected at least that the pigs
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her
daughter.‚Äù

‚ÄúLa! my dear,‚Äù said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, ‚Äúit is not
Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them;
the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little
creature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?‚Äù

‚ÄúShe is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.
Why does she not come in?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours
when Miss de Bourgh comes in.‚Äù

‚ÄúI like her appearance,‚Äù said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. ‚ÄúShe
looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will
make him a very proper wife.‚Äù

Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation
with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, was
stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness
before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that
way.

At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two
girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked
to dine at Rosings the next day.



Chapter 29


Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity
of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady
Catherine's condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.

‚ÄúI confess,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúthat I should not have been at all surprised by
her ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at
Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it
would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who
could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there
(an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately
after your arrival!‚Äù

‚ÄúI am the less surprised at what has happened,‚Äù replied Sir William,
‚Äúfrom that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.‚Äù

Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their
visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what
they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and
so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.

When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth--

‚ÄúDo not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which
becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion
for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you
for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank
preserved.‚Äù

While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of
her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas
who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her
introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done
to his presentation at St. James's.

As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a
mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.

When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every
moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.
Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady
Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thought
she could witness without trepidation.

From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a
rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments, they
followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady
Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship,
with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had
settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should
be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those
apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.

In spite of having been at St. James's, Sir William was so completely
awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage
enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge
of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her
composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked
features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not
conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by
silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone,
as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to
Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.

When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the
daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria's astonishment at her
being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any
likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very
little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
her eyes.

After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to
admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth
looking at in the summer.

The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants and
all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had
likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her
ladyship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish
nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted
alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Sir
William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law
said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.
But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and
gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved
a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth
was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated
between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all
dinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little
Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing
she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the
gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.

When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to
be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any
intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every
subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used to
have her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte's domestic
concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice as
to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be
regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was
beneath this great lady's attention, which could furnish her with an
occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse
with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew
the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel,
pretty kind of girl. She asked her, at different times, how many sisters
she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been
her mother's maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of
her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then
observed,

‚ÄúYour father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For your
sake,‚Äù turning to Charlotte, ‚ÄúI am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family. Do you play and sing, Miss
Bennet?‚Äù

‚ÄúA little.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our
instrument is a capital one, probably superior to----You shall try it
some day. Do your sisters play and sing?‚Äù

‚ÄúOne of them does.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhy did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do
you draw?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, not at all.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat, none of you?‚Äù

‚ÄúNot one.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.‚Äù

‚ÄúHas your governess left you?‚Äù

‚ÄúWe never had any governess.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home
without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must
have been quite a slave to your education.‚Äù

Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not been
the case.

‚ÄúThen, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, you
must have been neglected.‚Äù

‚ÄúCompared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as
wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be
idle, certainly might.‚Äù

‚ÄúAye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had
known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage
one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that
way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces
of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and
it was but the other day that I recommended another young person,
who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalf's
calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. 'Lady
Catherine,' said she, 'you have given me a treasure.' Are any of your
younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, ma'am, all.‚Äù

‚ÄúAll! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The
younger ones out before the elder ones are married! Your younger sisters
must be very young?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to be
much in company. But really, ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon
younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to
marry early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth
as the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it would
not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.‚Äù

‚ÄúUpon my word,‚Äù said her ladyship, ‚Äúyou give your opinion very decidedly
for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?‚Äù

‚ÄúWith three younger sisters grown up,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, smiling, ‚Äúyour
ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.‚Äù

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.

‚ÄúYou cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need not
conceal your age.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am not one-and-twenty.‚Äù

When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tables
were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her
party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson
expressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh's being too hot or too cold, or
having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the
other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins
was employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said, thanking her
for every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many.
Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes
and noble names.

When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,
gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were
to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by
the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
Collins's side and as many bows on Sir William's they departed. As soon
as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin
to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for
Charlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her
commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy
Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise
into his own hands.



Chapter 30


Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was long
enough to convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled,
and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not
often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his
morning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; but
when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast
and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or in
reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own book-room,
which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
more pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent
reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been
much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and
she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.

From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
along, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and
had a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever
prevailed upon to get out.

Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship,
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
out that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for her family.

Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in
commission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistrate
in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her
by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to
be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty.

The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one
card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living
in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins's reach. This,
however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
comfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation with
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year that she had
often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she
frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.

In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
important. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy was
expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not
many of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming would
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on him
were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently
destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by
Miss Lucas and herself.

His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making his
bow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the great
intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his
respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for
Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of
his uncle Lord ----, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when
Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen
them from her husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running
into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:

‚ÄúI may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would
never have come so soon to wait upon me.‚Äù

Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been
used to look in Hertfordshire--paid his compliments, with his usual
reserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward her
friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely
curtseyed to him without saying a word.

Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.
At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of
Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual
way, and after a moment's pause, added:

‚ÄúMy eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never
happened to see her there?‚Äù

She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see
whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between
the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as he
answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The
subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
away.



Chapter 31


Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasures
of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they
received any invitation thither--for while there were visitors in the
house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little
of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the
Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seen
only at church.

The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined
the party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room. Her ladyship received
them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
much more than to any other person in the room.

Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was a
welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had
moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself,
as well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a
while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not
scruple to call out:

‚ÄúWhat is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking
of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.‚Äù

‚ÄúWe are speaking of music, madam,‚Äù said he, when no longer able to avoid
a reply.

‚ÄúOf music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I
must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music.
There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment
of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt,
I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health
had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performed
delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?‚Äù

Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency.

‚ÄúI am very glad to hear such a good account of her,‚Äù said Lady
Catherine; ‚Äúand pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel
if she does not practice a good deal.‚Äù

‚ÄúI assure you, madam,‚Äù he replied, ‚Äúthat she does not need such advice.
She practises very constantly.‚Äù

‚ÄúSo much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often
tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without
constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she
will never play really well unless she practises more; and though Mrs.
Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told
her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.
Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part
of the house.‚Äù

Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill-breeding, and made
no answer.

When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away
from her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's
countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:

‚ÄúYou mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
me? I will not be alarmed though your sister _does_ play so well. There
is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the
will of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate
me.‚Äù

‚ÄúI shall not say you are mistaken,‚Äù he replied, ‚Äúbecause you could not
really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I have
had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find
great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are
not your own.‚Äù

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
Colonel Fitzwilliam, ‚ÄúYour cousin will give you a very pretty notion of
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky
in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a part
of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of
credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all
that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me leave to
say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such
things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am not afraid of you,‚Äù said he, smilingly.

‚ÄúPray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,‚Äù cried Colonel
Fitzwilliam. ‚ÄúI should like to know how he behaves among strangers.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou shall hear then--but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.
The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know,
was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced
only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain
knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a
partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.‚Äù

‚ÄúI had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
beyond my own party.‚Äù

‚ÄúTrue; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel
Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps,‚Äù said Darcy, ‚ÄúI should have judged better, had I sought an
introduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.‚Äù

‚ÄúShall we ask your cousin the reason of this?‚Äù said Elizabeth, still
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. ‚ÄúShall we ask him why a man of sense and
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend
himself to strangers?‚Äù

‚ÄúI can answer your question,‚Äù said Fitzwilliam, ‚Äúwithout applying to
him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.‚Äù

‚ÄúI certainly have not the talent which some people possess,‚Äù said Darcy,
‚Äúof conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
concerns, as I often see done.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy fingers,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúdo not move over this instrument in the
masterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have not the same
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I will not take the
trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers as
capable as any other woman's of superior execution.‚Äù

Darcy smiled and said, ‚ÄúYou are perfectly right. You have employed your
time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can
think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.‚Äù

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
to Darcy:

‚ÄúMiss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and
could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion
of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would have
been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.‚Äù

Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his
cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
de Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have
been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.

Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing
with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the
gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship's carriage was
ready to take them all home.



Chapter 32


Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to
be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her
half-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions,
when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and
Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.

He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his
intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies were
to be within.

They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely
necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence
recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and
feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty
departure, she observed:

‚ÄúHow very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!
It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you
all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?‚Äù

‚ÄúPerfectly so, I thank you.‚Äù

She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short
pause added:

‚ÄúI think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever
returning to Netherfield again?‚Äù

‚ÄúI have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend
very little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, and
is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
increasing.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for
the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we
might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
for his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the same
principle.‚Äù

‚ÄúI should not be surprised,‚Äù said Darcy, ‚Äúif he were to give it up as
soon as any eligible purchase offers.‚Äù

Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
trouble of finding a subject to him.

He took the hint, and soon began with, ‚ÄúThis seems a very comfortable
house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.
Collins first came to Hunsford.‚Äù

‚ÄúI believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
kindness on a more grateful object.‚Äù

‚ÄúMr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one
of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made
him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the
wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a
prudential light it is certainly a very good match for her.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a
distance of her own family and friends.‚Äù

‚ÄúAn easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day's
journey. Yes, I call it a _very_ easy distance.‚Äù

‚ÄúI should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
of the match,‚Äù cried Elizabeth. ‚ÄúI should never have said Mrs. Collins
was settled _near_ her family.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.‚Äù

As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered:

‚ÄúI do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her
family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses of
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the
case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_
the present distance.‚Äù

Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, ‚Äú_You_ cannot
have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot have
been always at Longbourn.‚Äù

Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and
glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:

‚ÄúAre you pleased with Kent?‚Äù

A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and her sister, just returned from her walk. The tete-a-tete surprised
them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding
on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying
much to anybody, went away.

‚ÄúWhat can be the meaning of this?‚Äù said Charlotte, as soon as he was
gone. ‚ÄúMy dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never
have called us in this familiar way.‚Äù

But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,
even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various
conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from
the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but gentlemen cannot
always be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of her
former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw
there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners,
she believed he might have the best informed mind.

But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult
to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak,
it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice
to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really
animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel
Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was
generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told
her; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effect
of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself
seriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were at
Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He
certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that
look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
seemed nothing but absence of mind.

She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her
opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend's dislike would
vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.


In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying
Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; he
certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.



Chapter 33


More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,
unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, to
prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first that
it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time,
therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was
not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,
but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He
never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking
or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third
rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--about
her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her
opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins's happiness; and that in speaking of
Rosings and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to
expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying
_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel
Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must
mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed
her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the
pales opposite the Parsonage.

She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane's last letter,
and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in
spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw
on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the
letter immediately and forcing a smile, she said:

‚ÄúI did not know before that you ever walked this way.‚Äù

‚ÄúI have been making the tour of the park,‚Äù he replied, ‚Äúas I generally
do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are
you going much farther?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, I should have turned in a moment.‚Äù

And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
together.

‚ÄúDo you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?‚Äù said she.

‚ÄúYes--if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He
arranges the business just as he pleases.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least
pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems
more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.‚Äù

‚ÄúHe likes to have his own way very well,‚Äù replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.
‚ÄúBut so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it
than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and
dependence.‚Äù

‚ÄúIn my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of
either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going
wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a fancy for?‚Äù

‚ÄúThese are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have
experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater
weight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where
they like.‚Äù

‚ÄúUnless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often
do.‚Äù

‚ÄúOur habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many
in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to
money.‚Äù

‚ÄúIs this,‚Äù thought Elizabeth, ‚Äúmeant for me?‚Äù and she coloured at the
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, ‚ÄúAnd pray, what
is the usual price of an earl's younger son? Unless the elder brother is
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.‚Äù

He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt
a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,
she soon afterwards said:

‚ÄúI imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of
having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a
lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well
for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he
likes with her.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said Colonel Fitzwilliam, ‚Äúthat is an advantage which he must
divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.‚Äù

‚ÄúAre you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does your
charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a
little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she
may like to have her own way.‚Äù

As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner
in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to
give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other
got pretty near the truth. She directly replied:

‚ÄúYou need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare
say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.‚Äù

‚ÄúI know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man--he
is a great friend of Darcy's.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! yes,‚Äù said Elizabeth drily; ‚ÄúMr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.
Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.‚Äù

‚ÄúCare of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him in
those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in
our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to
him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that
Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat is it you mean?‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known,
because if it were to get round to the lady's family, it would be an
unpleasant thing.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou may depend upon my not mentioning it.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other
particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing
him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.‚Äù

‚ÄúDid Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?‚Äù

‚ÄúI understood that there were some very strong objections against the
lady.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd what arts did he use to separate them?‚Äù

‚ÄúHe did not talk to me of his own arts,‚Äù said Fitzwilliam, smiling. ‚ÄúHe
only told me what I have now told you.‚Äù

Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she
was so thoughtful.

‚ÄúI am thinking of what you have been telling me,‚Äù said she. ‚ÄúYour
cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are rather disposed to call his interference officious?‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his
friend's inclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was to
determine and direct in what manner his friend was to be happy.
But,‚Äù she continued, recollecting herself, ‚Äúas we know none of the
particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposed
that there was much affection in the case.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is not an unnatural surmise,‚Äù said Fitzwilliam, ‚Äúbut it is a
lessening of the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly.‚Äù

This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a picture
of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent
matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,
as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption
of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other
people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There
could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have
such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures
taken to separate Bingley and Jane she had never doubted; but she had
always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement
of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, _he_ was
the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had
suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while
every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the
world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.

‚ÄúThere were some very strong objections against the lady,‚Äù were Colonel
Fitzwilliam's words; and those strong objections probably were, her
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
business in London.

‚ÄúTo Jane herself,‚Äù she exclaimed, ‚Äúthere could be no possibility of
objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!--her understanding
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither
could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some
peculiarities, has abilities Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and
respectability which he will probably never reach.‚Äù When she thought of
her mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow
that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose
pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of
importance in his friend's connections, than from their want of sense;
and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governed
by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr.
Bingley for his sister.

The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to
her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go and as much
as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine's being rather
displeased by her staying at home.



Chapter 34


When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself
as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her
being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any
revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.
But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
cheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which,
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly
disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy's
shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her
a keener sense of her sister's sufferings. It was some consolation
to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the
next--and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should
herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of
her spirits, by all that affection could do.

She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without remembering that
his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear
that he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not
mean to be unhappy about him.

While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the
door-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently
affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the
room. In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.
She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and
then getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her
in an agitated manner, and thus began:

‚ÄúIn vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be
repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love
you.‚Äù

Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured,
doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement;
and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her,
immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides
those of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on the
subject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority--of
its being a degradation--of the family obstacles which had always
opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to
the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his
suit.

In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to
the compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intentions did
not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to
receive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she
lost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to
answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with
representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in spite
of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and with
expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of
his hand. As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubt
of a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but
his countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance could
only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into her
cheeks, and she said:

‚ÄúIn such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should
be felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly
bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to
anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be
of short duration. The feelings which, you tell me, have long prevented
the acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in
overcoming it after this explanation.‚Äù

Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed
on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance
of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the
appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed
himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth's feelings
dreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said:

‚ÄúAnd this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting!
I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at
civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.‚Äù

‚ÄúI might as well inquire,‚Äù replied she, ‚Äúwhy with so evident a desire
of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I have
other provocations. You know I have. Had not my feelings decided against
you--had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you
think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has
been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most
beloved sister?‚Äù

As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she
continued:

‚ÄúI have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,
you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other--of exposing one to the censure of the
world for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
kind.‚Äù

She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening
with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.
He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.

‚ÄúCan you deny that you have done it?‚Äù she repeated.

With assumed tranquillity he then replied: ‚ÄúI have no wish of denying
that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your
sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have been
kinder than towards myself.‚Äù

Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,
but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.

‚ÄúBut it is not merely this affair,‚Äù she continued, ‚Äúon which my dislike
is founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of you was
decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received
many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to
say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?‚Äù

‚ÄúYou take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns,‚Äù said Darcy,
in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.

‚ÄúWho that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an
interest in him?‚Äù

‚ÄúHis misfortunes!‚Äù repeated Darcy contemptuously; ‚Äúyes, his misfortunes
have been great indeed.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd of your infliction,‚Äù cried Elizabeth with energy. ‚ÄúYou have reduced
him to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You have
withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for
him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence
which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this!
and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and
ridicule.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd this,‚Äù cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,
‚Äúis your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me!
I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,‚Äù added he, stopping in
his walk, and turning towards her, ‚Äúthese offenses might have been
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These
bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater
policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of
my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by
reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.
Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and
just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whose
condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?‚Äù

Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to
the utmost to speak with composure when she said:

‚ÄúYou are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your
declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern
which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more
gentlemanlike manner.‚Äù

She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued:

‚ÄúYou could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way that
would have tempted me to accept it.‚Äù

Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on:

‚ÄúFrom the very beginning--from the first moment, I may almost say--of
my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of
the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of
disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
wishes for your health and happiness.‚Äù

And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him
the next moment open the front door and quit the house.

The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how
to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for
half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed,
was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of
marriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have been in love with her for
so many months! So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of
all the objections which had made him prevent his friend's marrying
her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his
own case--was almost incredible! It was gratifying to have inspired
unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable
pride--his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to
Jane--his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could
not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr.
Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon
overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for
a moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till the
sound of Lady Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was to
encounter Charlotte's observation, and hurried her away to her room.



Chapter 35


Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the
surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anything
else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after
breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding
directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
she turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. The
park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one
of the gates into the ground.

After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk,
when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which
edged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr.
Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now
near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced
her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though
in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the
gate. He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter,
which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure,
‚ÄúI have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you.
Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?‚Äù And then, with a
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written
quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise
full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated
from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows:--

‚ÄúBe not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension
of its containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those
offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any
intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes
which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the
effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,
should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written
and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand
your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I
demand it of your justice.

‚ÄúTwo offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equal
magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was,
that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley
from your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of various
claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate
prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and
wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other
dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect
its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young
persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could
bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last
night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope
to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions
and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which
is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which
may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity
must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.

‚ÄúI had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with
others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young
woman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the dance
at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious
attachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I
had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir
William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions to
your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage.
He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could
be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend's behaviour
attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss
Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also
watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever,
but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced
from the evening's scrutiny, that though she received his attentions
with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of
sentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken here, _I_ must have been
in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter
probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict
pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not
scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister's countenance and
air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction
that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be
easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is
certain--but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisions
are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe
her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial
conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the
marriage were not merely those which I last night acknowledged to have
the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want of
connection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me. But
there were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still
existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had
myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before
me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your
mother's family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that
total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by
herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your
father. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern
for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this
representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to
have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure,
is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than
it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only say
farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties
was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have led
me before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy
connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, as
you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.

‚ÄúThe part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters' uneasiness
had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was
soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in
detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in
London. We accordingly went--and there I readily engaged in the office
of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I
described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrance
might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose
that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been
seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your
sister's indifference. He had before believed her to return his
affection with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great
natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on his
own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was
no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into
Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the
work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There
is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not
reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the
measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister's being in
town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her
brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without
ill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to me
enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this
concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and it
was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no
other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister's feelings, it
was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to
you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemn
them.

‚ÄúWith respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured
Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his
connection with my family. Of what he has _particularly_ accused me I
am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more
than one witness of undoubted veracity.

‚ÄúMr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many
years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good
conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to
be of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his
kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at
school, and afterwards at Cambridge--most important assistance, as his
own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have
been unable to give him a gentleman's education. My father was not only
fond of this young man's society, whose manners were always engaging; he
had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be
his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is
many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different
manner. The vicious propensities--the want of principle, which he was
careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape
the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself,
and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr.
Darcy could not have. Here again I shall give you pain--to what degree
you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham
has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from
unfolding his real character--it adds even another motive.

‚ÄúMy excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to
Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly
recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner
that his profession might allow--and if he took orders, desired that a
valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There
was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not long
survive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mr. Wickham
wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders,
he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more
immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he
could not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying
law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would
be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believed
him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to
his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the
business was therefore soon settled--he resigned all claim to assistance
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to
receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connection
between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him
to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town I believe he chiefly
lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free
from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation.
For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the
incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to
me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured
me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He
had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely
resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in
question--of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was
well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not
have forgotten my revered father's intentions. You will hardly blame
me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every
repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of
his circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me
to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every
appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. But
last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.

‚ÄúI must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself,
and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold
to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your
secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to
the guardianship of my mother's nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself.
About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formed
for her in London; and last summer she went with the lady who presided
over it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by
design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him
and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and
by her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana,
whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to
her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and
to consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her
excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed
the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two
before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the
idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as
a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and
how I acted. Regard for my sister's credit and feelings prevented
any public exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place
immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr.
Wickham's chief object was unquestionably my sister's fortune, which
is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of
revenging himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have
been complete indeed.

‚ÄúThis, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have
been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as
false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr.
Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he
had imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered
at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either,
detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in
your inclination.

‚ÄúYou may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; but
I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to
be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more
particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our
near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of
the executors of my father's will, has been unavoidably acquainted
with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of _me_
should make _my_ assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by
the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be
the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some
opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the
morning. I will only add, God bless you.

‚ÄúFITZWILLIAM DARCY‚Äù



Chapter 36


If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to
contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of
its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerly
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did
she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;
and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation
to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong
prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what
had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly
left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the
next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of
the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister's insensibility she
instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst
objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing
him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied
her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and
insolence.

But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--when
she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which,
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her
feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.
Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished
to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, ‚ÄúThis must be false!
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!‚Äù--and when she had
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the
last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
regard it, that she would never look in it again.

In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter
was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what
he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though
she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own
words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the
will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living
was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the
particulars immediately following of Wickham's resigning all pretensions
to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down
the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read
on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to
render Mr. Darcy's conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a
turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.

The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at
Mr. Wickham's charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could
bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his
entrance into the ----shire Militia, in which he had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town,
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life
nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told himself. As
to his real character, had information been in her power, she had
never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had
established him at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried
to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of
integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of
Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those
casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy
had described as the idleness and vice of many years' continuance. But
no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before
her, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more
substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and
the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After
pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to
read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss
Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was
referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam
himself--from whom she had previously received the information of his
near concern in all his cousin's affairs, and whose character she had no
reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to
him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and
at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never
have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his
cousin's corroboration.

She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation
between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips's.
Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear
of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfield
family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but
herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed;
that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy's
character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would
always prevent his exposing the son.

How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned!
His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.
His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he had
either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter
and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago
asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their
acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything
that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him
of irreligious or immoral habits; that among his own connections he was
esteemed and valued--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
sister as to prove him capable of _some_ amiable feeling; that had his
actions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man
as Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible.

She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
could she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced,
absurd.

‚ÄúHow despicably I have acted!‚Äù she cried; ‚ÄúI, who have prided myself
on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified
my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! How humiliating is this
discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could
not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been my
folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were
concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself.‚Äù

From herself to Jane--from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line
which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation
_there_ had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely
different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that
credit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged to
give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of her
sister's attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte's
opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his
description of Jane. She felt that Jane's feelings, though fervent, were
little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air
and manner not often united with great sensibility.

When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her sense
of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly
for denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind
than on hers.

The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed,
but it could not console her for the contempt which had thus been
self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered
that Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she
had ever known before.

After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
variety of thought--re-considering events, determining probabilities,
and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and
so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made
her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish
of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such
reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.

She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take
leave--but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her
till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern
in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no
longer an object; she could think only of her letter.



Chapter 37


The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins having
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then
hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of
having them all to dine with her.

Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had
she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as
her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her
ladyship's indignation would have been. ‚ÄúWhat would she have said? how
would she have behaved?‚Äù were questions with which she amused herself.

Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. ‚ÄúI assure
you, I feel it exceedingly,‚Äù said Lady Catherine; ‚ÄúI believe no one
feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly
attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to
me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The
dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. His
attachment to Rosings certainly increases.‚Äù

Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.

Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
spirits, and immediately accounting for it by herself, by supposing that
she did not like to go home again so soon, she added:

‚ÄúBut if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that
you may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your
company, I am sure.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,‚Äù replied
Elizabeth, ‚Äúbut it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town
next Saturday.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhy, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected
you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There
can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly
spare you for another fortnight.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters
are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay
another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as
far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as
Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room
for one of you--and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I
should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
original plan.‚Äù

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. ‚ÄúMrs. Collins, you must send a servant
with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea
of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.
You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in
the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly
guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my
niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her
having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of
Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those
things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I
am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be
discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy uncle is to send a servant for us.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you
have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you change horses?
Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be
attended to.‚Äù

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey,
and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary,
which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so
occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be
reserved for solitary hours; whenever she was alone, she gave way to it
as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary
walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant
recollections.

Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She
studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at
times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,
she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustly
she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but she
could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal,
or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in
the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.
They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there
forever.

Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's
explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved
to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any
could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How
grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had
been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!

When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham's
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it
almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.

Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent
there; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.

When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her
hand to both.



Chapter 38


On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.

‚ÄúI know not, Miss Elizabeth,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúwhether Mrs. Collins has yet
expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very
certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for
it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We
know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain
manner of living, our small rooms and few domestics, and the little we
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spending
your time unpleasantly.‚Äù

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She
had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make _her_
feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling
solemnity replied:

‚ÄúIt gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not
disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately
having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and,
from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the
humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford
visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to
Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage
and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You
see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge
that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should
not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are
sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.‚Äù

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
and truth in a few short sentences.

‚ÄúYou may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you will
be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be
as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,
that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in
marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of
character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each
other.‚Äù

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was
the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to
have the recital of them interrupted by the lady from whom they sprang.
Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she
had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that
her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her
home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their
dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her
with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her
in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,
when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings.

‚ÄúBut,‚Äù he added, ‚Äúyou will of course wish to have your humble respects
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
while you have been here.‚Äù

Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and
the carriage drove off.

‚ÄúGood gracious!‚Äù cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence, ‚Äúit seems
but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have
happened!‚Äù

‚ÄúA great many indeed,‚Äù said her companion with a sigh.

‚ÄúWe have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
How much I shall have to tell!‚Äù

Elizabeth added privately, ‚ÄúAnd how much I shall have to conceal!‚Äù

Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's
house, where they were to remain a few days.

Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her
aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.

It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for
Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy's proposals. To know
that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation
to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate;
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried
into repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister
further.



Chapter 39


It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage
was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs.
These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
dressing a salad and cucumber.

After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,
‚ÄúIs not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd we mean to treat you all,‚Äù added Lydia, ‚Äúbut you must lend us the
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.‚Äù Then, showing
her purchases--‚ÄúLook here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think
it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
better.‚Äù

And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect
unconcern, ‚ÄúOh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I
think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
are going in a fortnight.‚Äù

‚ÄúAre they indeed!‚Äù cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.

‚ÄúThey are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme;
and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to
go too of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
have!‚Äù

‚ÄúYes,‚Äù thought Elizabeth, ‚Äú_that_ would be a delightful scheme indeed,
and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole
campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!‚Äù

‚ÄúNow I have got some news for you,‚Äù said Lydia, as they sat down at
table. ‚ÄúWhat do you think? It is excellent news--capital news--and about
a certain person we all like!‚Äù

Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need
not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:

‚ÄúAye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse
things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad
he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for
my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not?
There is no danger of Wickham's marrying Mary King. There's for you! She
is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd Mary King is safe!‚Äù added Elizabeth; ‚Äúsafe from a connection
imprudent as to fortune.‚Äù

‚ÄúShe is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,‚Äù said Jane.

‚ÄúI am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared
three straws about her--who could about such a nasty little freckled
thing?‚Äù

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
was little other than her own breast had harboured and fancied liberal!

As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and
Lydia's purchases, were seated in it.

‚ÄúHow nicely we are all crammed in,‚Äù cried Lydia. ‚ÄúI am glad I bought my
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox! Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all
since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any
flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.
She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not
being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to
get husbands, you can't think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.
Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!
how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would
chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes on purpose to pass for a
lady, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.
Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.
Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.‚Äù

With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did
Lydia, assisted by Kitty's hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her
companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name.

Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet
say voluntarily to Elizabeth:

‚ÄúI am glad you are come back, Lizzy.‚Äù

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects that
occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare and
poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one
hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat
some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger
Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's,
was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who
would hear her.

‚ÄúOh! Mary,‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and pretended there
was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty
had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved
very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold
luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated
you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never
should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then
we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that
anybody might have heard us ten miles off!‚Äù

To this Mary very gravely replied, ‚ÄúFar be it from me, my dear sister,
to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the
generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for
_me_--I should infinitely prefer a book.‚Äù

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to
anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.

In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk
to Meryton, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily
opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could
not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.
There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr.
Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The
comfort to _her_ of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed beyond
expression. In a fortnight they were to go--and once gone, she hoped
there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.

She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brighton
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.



Chapter 40


Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could
no longer be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress every
particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be
surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene
between Mr. Darcy and herself.

Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was
sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so
little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the
unhappiness which her sister's refusal must have given him.

‚ÄúHis being so sure of succeeding was wrong,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúand certainly
ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his
disappointment!‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, ‚ÄúI am heartily sorry for him; but he has
other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.
You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?‚Äù

‚ÄúBlame you! Oh, no.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut you _will_ know it, when I tell you what happened the very next
day.‚Äù

She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far
as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane!
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here
collected in one individual. Nor was Darcy's vindication, though
grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery.
Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear the one without involving the other.

‚ÄúThis will not do,‚Äù said Elizabeth; ‚Äúyou never will be able to make both
of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied
with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting
about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Darcy's;
but you shall do as you choose.‚Äù

It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.

‚ÄúI do not know when I have been more shocked,‚Äù said she. ‚ÄúWickham so
very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only
consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the
knowledge of your ill opinion, too! and having to relate such a thing
of his sister! It is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel it
so.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so
full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am
growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion
makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will
be as light as a feather.‚Äù

‚ÄúPoor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his
countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner!‚Äù

‚ÄúThere certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those
two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
appearance of it.‚Äù

‚ÄúI never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you
used to do.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike
to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one's genius, such an
opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually
abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot always be laughing
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.‚Äù

‚ÄúLizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat
the matter as you do now.‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say unhappy. And
with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane to comfort me and say
that I had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I knew I
had! Oh! how I wanted you!‚Äù

‚ÄúHow unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly
undeserved.‚Äù

‚ÄúCertainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There
is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I
ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintances in general understand
Wickham's character.‚Äù

Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, ‚ÄúSurely there can be no
occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your opinion?‚Äù

‚ÄúThat it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorised me
to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular
relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to
myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his
conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy
is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in
Meryton to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal
to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to
anyone here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out,
and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At
present I will say nothing about it.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for
ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to
re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.‚Äù

The tumult of Elizabeth's mind was allayed by this conversation. She had
got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight,
and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish
to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind,
of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other
half of Mr. Darcy's letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she
had been valued by her friend. Here was knowledge in which no one
could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect
understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off
this last encumbrance of mystery. ‚ÄúAnd then,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúif that very
improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to
tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. The
liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!‚Äù

She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real
state of her sister's spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a
very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself
in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment,
and, from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than most first
attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance,
and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her
attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the
indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own
health and their tranquillity.

‚ÄúWell, Lizzy,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet one day, ‚Äúwhat is your opinion _now_ of
this sad business of Jane's? For my part, I am determined never to speak
of it again to anybody. I told my sister Phillips so the other day. But
I cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is
a very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there's the least
chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of
his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of
everybody, too, who is likely to know.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come. Though I
shall always say he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was her, I
would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Jane will
die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done.‚Äù

But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation,
she made no answer.

‚ÄúWell, Lizzy,‚Äù continued her mother, soon afterwards, ‚Äúand so the
Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope
it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an
excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her
mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_
housekeeping, I dare say.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, nothing at all.‚Äù

‚ÄúA great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes, _they_ will
take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed
for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it as
quite their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt was a subject which they could not mention before me.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt they
often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I should be
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.‚Äù



Chapter 41


The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was
the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies
in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost
universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
hard-heartedness in any of the family.

‚ÄúGood Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?‚Äù would they
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. ‚ÄúHow can you be smiling so,
Lizzy?‚Äù

Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what
she had herself endured on a similar occasion, five-and-twenty years
ago.

‚ÄúI am sure,‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI cried for two days together when Colonel
Miller's regiment went away. I thought I should have broken my heart.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am sure I shall break _mine_,‚Äù said Lydia.

‚ÄúIf one could but go to Brighton!‚Äù observed Mrs. Bennet.

‚ÄúOh, yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so
disagreeable.‚Äù

‚ÄúA little sea-bathing would set me up forever.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd my aunt Phillips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,‚Äù
 added Kitty.

Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense
of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy's
objections; and never had she been so much disposed to pardon his
interference in the views of his friend.

But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for she
received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of
the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a
very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good humour
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
their _three_ months' acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.

The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster,
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister's feelings, Lydia
flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone's
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repined at her fate
in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.

‚ÄúI cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,‚Äù
 said she, ‚ÄúThough I am _not_ her particular friend. I have just as much
right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.‚Äù

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make
her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she
considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it
known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her
go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia's general
behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must
be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said:

‚ÄúLydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some public
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so
little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present
circumstances.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf you were aware,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúof the very great disadvantage to
us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and
imprudent manner--nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you
would judge differently in the affair.‚Äù

‚ÄúAlready arisen?‚Äù repeated Mr. Bennet. ‚ÄúWhat, has she frightened away
some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such
squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity
are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of pitiful fellows who
have been kept aloof by Lydia's folly.‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not
of particular, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our
importance, our respectability in the world must be affected by the
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
Lydia's character. Excuse me, for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of
her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character
will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond
youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness
of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal
contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger
Kitty also is comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
disgrace?‚Äù

Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject, and
affectionately taking her hand said in reply:

‚ÄúDo not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly
sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to
Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an
object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance
even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find
women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow
many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest
of her life.‚Äù

With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not
in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on
them. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret
over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her
disposition.

Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their
united volubility. In Lydia's imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.
She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them
at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp--its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six
officers at once.

Had she known her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such
realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could have
been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same.
Lydia's going to Brighton was all that consoled her for her melancholy
conviction of her husband's never intending to go there himself.

But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia's leaving
home.

Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been
frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted
her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present
behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure,
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after
what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever
cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,
and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.

On the very last day of the regiment's remaining at Meryton, he dined,
with other of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former.

He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's
recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen
him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,
asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour.
With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added:

‚ÄúHow long did you say he was at Rosings?‚Äù

‚ÄúNearly three weeks.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd you saw him frequently?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, almost every day.‚Äù

‚ÄúHis manners are very different from his cousin's.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy improves upon acquaintance.‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed!‚Äù cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her. ‚ÄúAnd
pray, may I ask?--‚Äù But checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, ‚ÄúIs
it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility
to his ordinary style?--for I dare not hope,‚Äù he continued in a lower
and more serious tone, ‚Äúthat he is improved in essentials.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, no!‚Äù said Elizabeth. ‚ÄúIn essentials, I believe, he is very much
what he ever was.‚Äù

While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a
something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive
and anxious attention, while she added:

‚ÄúWhen I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that
his mind or his manners were in a state of improvement, but that, from
knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.‚Äù

Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
look; for a few minutes he was silent, till, shaking off his
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
accents:

‚ÄúYou, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily
comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume
even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction,
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must only
deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only
fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been
alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good
opinion and judgement he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always
operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be
imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I
am certain he has very much at heart.‚Äù

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a
slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
him. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his
side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
mutual desire of never meeting again.

When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,
from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the
only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs.
Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,
and impressive in her injunctions that she should not miss the
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible--advice which
there was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and in
the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more
gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.



Chapter 42


Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could
not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic
comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
of good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,
esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views
of domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of
a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own
imprudence had brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as
her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.

Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her
father's behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to
banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so
strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used,
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.

When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure she found little
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties
abroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother and
sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around
them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all
her folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a
watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had been
looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the
satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity--to have
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes
was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the
scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

‚ÄúBut it is fortunate,‚Äù thought she, ‚Äúthat I have something to wish for.
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my
sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of
pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight can
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
the defence of some little peculiar vexation.‚Äù

When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which
she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going off to
the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still
less to be learnt--for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were
much too full of lines under the words to be made public.

After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good
humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything wore
a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came
back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet
was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of
June, Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without
tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by
the following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to
mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious
arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quartered in
Meryton.

The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast
approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
within a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the
present plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire. In that
county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three
weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The
town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale, or the Peak.

Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing
the Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But it
was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.

With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected. It was
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
owner. ‚ÄúBut surely,‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI may enter his county with impunity,
and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me.‚Äù

The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away
before her uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their
cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the
next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.
One enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness of companions;
a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
disappointments abroad.

It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc. are
sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's
former residence, and where she had lately learned some acquaintance
still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the
principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton,
Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was not
in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed
an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.

‚ÄúMy love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard
so much?‚Äù said her aunt; ‚Äúa place, too, with which so many of your
acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you
know.‚Äù

Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She
must own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after going over so
many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.

Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. ‚ÄúIf it were merely a fine house
richly furnished,‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI should not care about it myself; but
the grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the
country.‚Äù

Elizabeth said no more--but her mind could not acquiesce. The
possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and
thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run such
a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved
that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to the
absence of the family were unfavourably answered.

Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name of its
proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question--and her
alarms now being removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike
to the scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.



Chapter 43


Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.

The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through
a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.

Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired
every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for
half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which
the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of
high woody hills; and in front, a stream of some natural importance was
swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She
had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural
beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that
to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!

They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of
meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
wonder at her being where she was.

The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly woman, much less
fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They
followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportioned
room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, which
they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance,
was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and
she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its
banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it,
with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking
different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be
seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to
the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of
his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of
splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.

‚ÄúAnd of this place,‚Äù thought she, ‚ÄúI might have been mistress! With
these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,‚Äù--recollecting
herself--‚Äúthat could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to
me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.‚Äù

This was a lucky recollection--it saved her from something very like
regret.

She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really
absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question
was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs.
Reynolds replied that he was, adding, ‚ÄúBut we expect him to-morrow, with
a large party of friends.‚Äù How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own
journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!

Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the
likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures,
over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.
The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was a picture of a young
gentleman, the son of her late master's steward, who had been brought
up by him at his own expense. ‚ÄúHe is now gone into the army,‚Äù she added;
‚Äúbut I am afraid he has turned out very wild.‚Äù

Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not
return it.

‚ÄúAnd that,‚Äù said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,
‚Äúis my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the
other--about eight years ago.‚Äù

‚ÄúI have heard much of your master's fine person,‚Äù said Mrs. Gardiner,
looking at the picture; ‚Äúit is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell
us whether it is like or not.‚Äù

Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
intimation of her knowing her master.

‚ÄúDoes that young lady know Mr. Darcy?‚Äù

Elizabeth coloured, and said: ‚ÄúA little.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma'am?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, very handsome.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you
will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late
master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
be then. He was very fond of them.‚Äù

This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's being among them.

Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn
when she was only eight years old.

‚ÄúAnd is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?‚Äù said Mrs. Gardiner.

‚ÄúOh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished!--She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is
a new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master; she
comes here to-morrow with him.‚Äù

Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her
communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either
by pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her
master and his sister.

‚ÄúIs your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?‚Äù

‚ÄúNot so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half his
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.‚Äù

‚ÄúExcept,‚Äù thought Elizabeth, ‚Äúwhen she goes to Ramsgate.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf your master would marry, you might see more of him.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know who is
good enough for him.‚Äù

Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, ‚ÄúIt is
very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.‚Äù

‚ÄúI say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,‚Äù
 replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she
listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, ‚ÄúI have
never known a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever
since he was four years old.‚Äù

This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her
ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion.
Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was
grateful to her uncle for saying:

‚ÄúThere are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in
having such a master.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could
not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and
he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the
world.‚Äù

Elizabeth almost stared at her. ‚ÄúCan this be Mr. Darcy?‚Äù thought she.

‚ÄúHis father was an excellent man,‚Äù said Mrs. Gardiner.

‚ÄúYes, ma'am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--just
as affable to the poor.‚Äù

Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs.
Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
furniture, in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family
prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.

‚ÄúHe is the best landlord, and the best master,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúthat ever
lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but
themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but will give
him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw
anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away
like other young men.‚Äù

‚ÄúIn what an amiable light does this place him!‚Äù thought Elizabeth.

‚ÄúThis fine account of him,‚Äù whispered her aunt as they walked, ‚Äúis not
quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps we might be deceived.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is not very likely; our authority was too good.‚Äù

On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty
sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when
last at Pemberley.

‚ÄúHe is certainly a good brother,‚Äù said Elizabeth, as she walked towards
one of the windows.

Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy's delight, when she should enter
the room. ‚ÄúAnd this is always the way with him,‚Äù she added. ‚ÄúWhatever
can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There
is nothing he would not do for her.‚Äù

The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were
all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings;
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss
Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
also more intelligible.

In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have
little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of
the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested
her--and she beheld a striking resemblance to Mr. Darcy, with such a
smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he
looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest
contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery.
Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father's
lifetime.

There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's mind, a more gentle
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of
their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise
of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she
considered how many people's happiness were in his guardianship!--how
much of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow!--how much of
good or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought
forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she
stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his
eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of
gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and
softened its impropriety of expression.

When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,
they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.

As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former
was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.

They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his
appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes
instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest
blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least
of perfect civility.

She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,
received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two
that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener's expression of surprise, on
beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer
she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the
alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that
he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few
minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in
her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent
had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as
to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed in
Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
distraction of his thoughts.

At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took
leave.

The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but
Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings,
followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her
coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the
world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light
might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely
thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did he
thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes
sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination;
for it was plain that he was that moment arrived--that moment alighted
from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again over
the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly
altered--what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was
amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family!
Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never
had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What
a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put
his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account
for it.

They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer
reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and
seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she
distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then
was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind--in
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,
she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice which was
not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in
seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with
composure.

At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind
aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.

They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,
ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of
the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the
valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading
many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish
of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.
With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round.
It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which
brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods,
to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed
it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene;
it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the
valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream,
and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it.
Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the
bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only
of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was,
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the
man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment
was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy
approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here
less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before
they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared
for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,
she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the
turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw
that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his
politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place;
but she had not got beyond the words ‚Äúdelightful,‚Äù and ‚Äúcharming,‚Äù when
some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of
Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed,
and she said no more.

Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked
her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared;
and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the
acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had
revolted in his offer to herself. ‚ÄúWhat will be his surprise,‚Äù thought
she, ‚Äúwhen he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of
fashion.‚Äù

The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore
it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by the
connection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, and
so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had
some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,
his taste, or his good manners.

The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcy
invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he
chose while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time
to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was
walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder.
Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment
must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and
continually was she repeating, ‚ÄúWhy is he so altered? From what can
it proceed? It cannot be for _me_--it cannot be for _my_ sake that his
manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a
change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me.‚Äù

After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to
the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated
in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found
Elizabeth's arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred
her husband's. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on
together. After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She wished him
to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the
place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been
very unexpected--‚Äúfor your housekeeper,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúinformed us that
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected
in the country.‚Äù He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that
business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours
before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. ‚ÄúThey
will join me early to-morrow,‚Äù he continued, ‚Äúand among them are some
who will claim an acquaintance with you--Mr. Bingley and his sisters.‚Äù

Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly
driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley's name had been the last
mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, _his_
mind was not very differently engaged.

‚ÄúThere is also one other person in the party,‚Äù he continued after a
pause, ‚Äúwho more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow
me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance
during your stay at Lambton?‚Äù

The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great
for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt
that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her
must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made
him think really ill of her.

They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and
pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of
the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
mile behind.

He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might
have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but
there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected
that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale
with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her
patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete was
over. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up they were all pressed to go
into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and
they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the
ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him
walking slowly towards the house.

The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.
‚ÄúHe is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming,‚Äù said her uncle.

‚ÄúThere _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,‚Äù replied her
aunt, ‚Äúbut it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, I
have seen nothing of it.‚Äù

‚ÄúI was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.‚Äù

‚ÄúTo be sure, Lizzy,‚Äù said her aunt, ‚Äúhe is not so handsome as Wickham;
or, rather, he has not Wickham's countenance, for his features
are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he was so
disagreeable?‚Äù

Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had liked
him better when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had never
seen him so pleasant as this morning.

‚ÄúBut perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,‚Äù replied
her uncle. ‚ÄúYour great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him
at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off
his grounds.‚Äù

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but
said nothing.

‚ÄúFrom what we have seen of him,‚Äù continued Mrs. Gardiner, ‚ÄúI really
should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by
anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look.
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he
speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would
not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the
good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character!
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal
master, I suppose, and _that_ in the eye of a servant comprehends every
virtue.‚Äù

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of
his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in
as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from
his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different
construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor
Wickham's so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming
her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.

Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now
approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to think of
anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning's walk they
had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an
intercourse renewed after many years' discontinuance.

The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy's civility, and, above
all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.



Chapter 44


Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit
her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequently
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.
But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their
arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were just returning to the inn
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in
a curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing
the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her
surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which she
expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on
the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt that
there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a
quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of
Elizabeth's feelings was at every moment increasing. She was quite
amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet,
she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much
in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally
suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.

She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of
inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.

Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new
acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her
being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was
only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from
her beyond a monosyllable.

Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance
womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother; but there
was sense and good humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly
unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much
relieved by discerning such different feelings.

They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that Bingley
was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick
step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All
Elizabeth's anger against him had been long done away; but had she still
felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected
cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He
inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked
and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.

To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage
than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before
them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed their observation towards
each with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from
those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew
what it was to love. Of the lady's sensations they remained a little
in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was
evident enough.

Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the
feelings of each of her visitors; she wanted to compose her own, and
to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she
endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingley
was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.

In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and, oh!
how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in
a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion
that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But,
though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his
behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No look
appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred
between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point
she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred
ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a
recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying
more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed
to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone
which had something of real regret, that it ‚Äúwas a very long time since
he had had the pleasure of seeing her;‚Äù and, before she could reply,
he added, ‚ÄúIt is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of
November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.‚Äù

Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards
took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether
_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question,
nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which
gave them meaning.

It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself;
but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of general
complaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so removed
from _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that
the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed however
temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When
she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion
of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a
disgrace--when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the
very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last
lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage--the difference, the change was
so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly
restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company
of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from
self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance
could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the
acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Rosings.

Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they arose
to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,
readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming however,
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.

Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth
again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to
make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all
this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased, and on
this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their
visitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with some
satisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been
little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her
uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.

But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it was
not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was
much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;
it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to
interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.

Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could
not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character
from their own feelings and his servant's report, without any reference
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known
would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest,
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible
that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had
nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not,
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town
where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he
was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.

With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held
there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the
son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known
fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind
him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.

As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion;
and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. She
certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she
had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him,
that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his
valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now heightened
into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in
his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,
which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem,
there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked.
It was gratitude; gratitude, not merely for having once loved her,
but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and
acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations
accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid
her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most
eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display
of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only
were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent
on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much
pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude--for to love, ardent
love, it must be attributed; and as such its impression on her was of a
sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be
exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him,
she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how
far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would
be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her
fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on her the renewal of
his addresses.

It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's in coming to see them on the
very day of her arrival at Pemberley, for she had reached it only to a
late breakfast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled,
by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that
it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following
morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.

Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting
some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.



Chapter 45


Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley's dislike of her had
originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how unwelcome her
appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with how
much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance would now be renewed.

On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.

In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
London. Georgiana's reception of them was very civil, but attended with
all the embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear
of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior
the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece,
however, did her justice, and pitied her.

By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and,
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind
of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.

Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,
and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity
of saying much. Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, she
feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Miss
Bingley's voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold
inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.

The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many
a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole
party--for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches soon collected
them round the table.

While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to
regret that he came.

He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left him
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the
smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its
objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions
to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that he
was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility:

‚ÄúPray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire Militia removed from Meryton?
They must be a great loss to _your_ family.‚Äù

In Darcy's presence she dared not mention Wickham's name; but Elizabeth
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
various recollections connected with him gave her a moment's distress;
but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she
presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. While
she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what
pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would
have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed
her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in
Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies
and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected
with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy's
meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections
her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very
wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and without
meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss
Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern
for the welfare of his friend.

Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able
to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely
recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which
had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have
fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.

Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above
mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage Miss
Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth's person,
behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother's
recommendation was enough to ensure her favour; his judgement could not
err. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana
without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When
Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to
him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.

‚ÄúHow very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,‚Äù she
cried; ‚ÄúI never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since
the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing
that we should not have known her again.‚Äù

However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented
himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other alteration than
her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer.

‚ÄúFor my own part,‚Äù she rejoined, ‚ÄúI must confess that I never could
see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose
wants character--there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes,
which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anything
extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do
not like at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion, which is intolerable.‚Äù

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however, and, from a
determination of making him speak, she continued:

‚ÄúI remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all
were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, '_She_
a beauty!--I should as soon call her mother a wit.' But afterwards she
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
one time.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes,‚Äù replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, ‚Äúbut _that_
was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since I have
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.‚Äù

He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.

Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
both. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked
of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit--of everything but
himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of
him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece's
beginning the subject.



Chapter 46


Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been
renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but
on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the
receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that
it had been missent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.

They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and
her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had been
written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:

‚ÄúSince writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a
most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be
assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia.
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,
from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our
surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am
very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing
to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step
(and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.
Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How
thankful am I that we never let them know what has been said against
him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about
twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at
eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have
passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect
him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of
their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly
know what I have written.‚Äù

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing
what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.

‚ÄúBy this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I
wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my
head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you,
and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham
and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has
taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone
to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the
day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia's short
letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna
Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W.
never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was
repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.
intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham,
but no further; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackney
coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that
is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road.
I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that
side London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing
them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but
without any success--no such people had been seen to pass through. With
the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions
to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved
for him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Our
distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the
worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might make
it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue
their first plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design against a
young woman of Lydia's connections, which is not likely, can I suppose
her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that
Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook his
head when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man to
be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she
exert herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. And
as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has
anger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of
confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you
have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the
first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not
so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I
take up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; but
circumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to
come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well,
that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still something
more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel
Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I am sure
I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any
measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to
be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence, my
uncle's advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will
immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! where, where is my uncle?‚Äù cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat
as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing
a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it was
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuous
manner made him start, and before he could recover himself to speak,
she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia's situation,
hastily exclaimed, ‚ÄúI beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find
Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have not
an instant to lose.‚Äù

‚ÄúGood God! what is the matter?‚Äù cried he, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, ‚ÄúI will not detain you a minute;
but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are
not well enough; you cannot go yourself.‚Äù

Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt how
little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back
the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless
an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and
mistress home instantly.

On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself, and
looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her,
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
‚ÄúLet me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you
present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, I thank you,‚Äù she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. ‚ÄúThere
is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by
some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.‚Äù

She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could
not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say
something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate
silence. At length she spoke again. ‚ÄúI have just had a letter from Jane,
with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My younger
sister has left all her friends--has eloped; has thrown herself into
the power of--of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton.
_You_ know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no
connections, nothing that can tempt him to--she is lost for ever.‚Äù

Darcy was fixed in astonishment. ‚ÄúWhen I consider,‚Äù she added in a yet
more agitated voice, ‚Äúthat I might have prevented it! I, who knew what
he was. Had I but explained some part of it only--some part of what I
learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not
have happened. But it is all--all too late now.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am grieved indeed,‚Äù cried Darcy; ‚Äúgrieved--shocked. But is it
certain--absolutely certain?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone to
Scotland.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?‚Äù

‚ÄúMy father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle's
immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But
nothing can be done--I know very well that nothing can be done. How is
such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have
not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!‚Äù

Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.

‚ÄúWhen _my_ eyes were opened to his real character--Oh! had I known what
I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too
much. Wretched, wretched mistake!‚Äù

Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking
up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air
gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her
power was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of family
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither
wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing
consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved
him, as now, when all love must be vain.

But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed
up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by
the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, ‚ÄúI am afraid you have been
long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my
stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything
could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to
such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may
seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I
fear, prevent my sister's having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley
to-day.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say that
urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as
long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long.‚Äù

He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for
her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only
one serious, parting look, went away.

As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as
had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full
of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would
formerly have rejoiced in its termination.

If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth's
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if
otherwise--if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or
unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on
a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given
somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the other
less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him
go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy must
produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched
business. Never, since reading Jane's second letter, had she entertained
a hope of Wickham's meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought,
could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least
of her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first
letter remained in her mind, she was all surprise--all astonishment that
Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry
for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared
incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachment
as this she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not suppose
Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intention
of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue
nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.

She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that
Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one
officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions
raised them in her opinion. Her affections had continually been
fluctuating but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and
mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she now
feel it!

She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
could be done for Lydia, her uncle's interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant's
account that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them
instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their
summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript
of the last with trembling energy.--Though Lydia had never been a
favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply
afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the
first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner promised every
assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked
him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit,
everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to
be off as soon as possible. ‚ÄúBut what is to be done about Pemberley?‚Äù
 cried Mrs. Gardiner. ‚ÄúJohn told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for
us; was it so?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.
_That_ is all settled.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat is all settled?‚Äù repeated the other, as she ran into her room to
prepare. ‚ÄúAnd are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real
truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!‚Äù

But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in the
hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure
to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.



Chapter 47


‚ÄúI have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,‚Äù said her uncle, as they
drove from the town; ‚Äúand really, upon serious consideration, I am much
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the
matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should
form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or
friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel's family, that I
am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends
would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is
not adequate to the risk!‚Äù

‚ÄúDo you really think so?‚Äù cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.

‚ÄúUpon my word,‚Äù said Mrs. Gardiner, ‚ÄúI begin to be of your uncle's
opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
interest, for him to be guilty of. I cannot think so very ill of
Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believe
him capable of it?‚Äù

‚ÄúNot, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other
neglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I
dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if that had been
the case?‚Äù

‚ÄúIn the first place,‚Äù replied Mr. Gardiner, ‚Äúthere is no absolute proof
that they are not gone to Scotland.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such
a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the
Barnet road.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell, then--supposing them to be in London. They may be there, though
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose. It is
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
expeditiously, married in London than in Scotland.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their
marriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most particular
friend, you see by Jane's account, was persuaded of his never intending
to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He
cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia--what attraction has she
beyond youth, health, and good humour that could make him, for her sake,
forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what
restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has
no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father's
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever
seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ would
do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
such a matter.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him
as to consent to live with him on any terms other than marriage?‚Äù

‚ÄúIt does seem, and it is most shocking indeed,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, with
tears in her eyes, ‚Äúthat a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such
a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.
Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young; she has never
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year,
nay, for a twelvemonth--she has been given up to nothing but amusement
and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.
Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
flirtation, and officers have been in her head. She has been doing
everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
greater--what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are
naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of
person and address that can captivate a woman.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut you see that Jane,‚Äù said her aunt, ‚Äúdoes not think so very ill of
Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt.‚Äù

‚ÄúOf whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be
their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt,
till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what
Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every
sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is
as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd do you really know all this?‚Äù cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity
as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.

‚ÄúI do indeed,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, colouring. ‚ÄúI told you, the other day,
of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you yourself, when last at
Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved
with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other
circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to
relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From
what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,
reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
her.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you
and Jane seem so well to understand?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. As that was the
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it
necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could
it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the
neighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it was
settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening
her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could be
in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a
consequence as _this_ could ensue, you may easily believe, was far
enough from my thoughts.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhen they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I
suppose, to believe them fond of each other?‚Äù

‚ÄúNot the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either
side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all
were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for
the first two months; but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular
attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and
wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,
who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.‚Äù

                          * * * * *

It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during
the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent.
Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find
no interval of ease or forgetfulness.

They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one night
on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was a
comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied
by long expectations.

The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and, when the
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.

Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from her
mother's apartment, immediately met her.

Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
heard of the fugitives.

‚ÄúNot yet,‚Äù replied Jane. ‚ÄúBut now that my dear uncle is come, I hope
everything will be well.‚Äù

‚ÄúIs my father in town?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd have you heard from him often?‚Äù

‚ÄúWe have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday to say
that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I
particularly begged him to do. He merely added that he should not write
again till he had something of importance to mention.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd my mother--how is she? How are you all?‚Äù

‚ÄúMy mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly
shaken. She is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing you
all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank
Heaven, are quite well.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut you--how are you?‚Äù cried Elizabeth. ‚ÄúYou look pale. How much you
must have gone through!‚Äù

Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were
engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach
of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.

When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth
had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of
good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested had not yet
deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,
to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.

Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes'
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage;
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the
errors of her daughter must principally be owing.

‚ÄúIf I had been able,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúto carry my point in going to Brighton,
with all my family, _this_ would not have happened; but poor dear Lydia
had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out
of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their
side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been
well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the
charge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child!
And now here's Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham,
wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to become
of us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his
grave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we
shall do.‚Äù

They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after
general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her
that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr.
Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.

‚ÄúDo not give way to useless alarm,‚Äù added he; ‚Äúthough it is right to be
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.
It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more we
may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make
him come home with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult
together as to what is to be done.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! my dear brother,‚Äù replied Mrs. Bennet, ‚Äúthat is exactly what I
could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but
tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,
after they are married. And, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting.
Tell him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my
wits--and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me--such
spasms in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that
I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not to
give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does
not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I
know you will contrive it all.‚Äù

But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well
in her hopes as her fear; and after talking with her in this manner till
dinner was on the table, they all left her to vent all her feelings on
the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.

Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to
oppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the
subject.

In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance
before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The
faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible
in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger
which she had herself incurred in this business, had given more of
fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was
mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance
of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:

‚ÄúThis is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.
But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
each other the balm of sisterly consolation.‚Äù

Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,
‚ÄúUnhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that one
false step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less
brittle than it is beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guarded in
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.‚Äù

Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed
to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.

In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for
half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of
the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued
the subject, by saying, ‚ÄúBut tell me all and everything about it which
I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel
Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement
took place? They must have seen them together for ever.‚Äù

‚ÄúColonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality,
especially on Lydia's side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so
grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He
_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
first got abroad, it hastened his journey.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of
their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; but, when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing anything of
their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying--and from _that_, I am
inclined to hope, he might have been misunderstood before.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?‚Äù

‚ÄúHow was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt
a little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister's happiness with him
in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite
right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last letter
she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other, many weeks.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut not before they went to Brighton?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, I believe not.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? Does
he know his real character?‚Äù

‚ÄúI must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly
did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad
affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt;
but I hope this may be false.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him,
this could not have happened!‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps it would have been better,‚Äù replied her sister. ‚ÄúBut to expose
the former faults of any person without knowing what their present
feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions.‚Äù

‚ÄúCould Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to his
wife?‚Äù

‚ÄúHe brought it with him for us to see.‚Äù

Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These
were the contents:

‚ÄúMY DEAR HARRIET,

‚ÄúYou will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am
missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who,
I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I
love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think
it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my
going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater,
when I write to them and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke
it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to
Pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night.
Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will
dance with him at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall
send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell
Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are
packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will
drink to our good journey.

‚ÄúYour affectionate friend,

‚ÄúLYDIA BENNET.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!‚Äù cried Elizabeth when she had
finished it. ‚ÄúWhat a letter is this, to be written at such a moment!
But at least it shows that _she_ was serious on the subject of their
journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her
side a _scheme_ of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!‚Äù

‚ÄúI never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten
minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
such confusion!‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! Jane,‚Äù cried Elizabeth, ‚Äúwas there a servant belonging to it who
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is
very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to
give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so
much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly happen
almost took from me my faculties.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look
well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety
upon yourself alone.‚Äù

‚ÄúMary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every
fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them.
Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much, that her hours
of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Phillips came to Longbourn
on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all. And
Lady Lucas has been very kind; she walked here on Wednesday morning to
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters', if
they should be of use to us.‚Äù

‚ÄúShe had better have stayed at home,‚Äù cried Elizabeth; ‚Äúperhaps she
_meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see
too little of one's neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.‚Äù

She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.

‚ÄúHe meant I believe,‚Äù replied Jane, ‚Äúto go to Epsom, the place where
they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if anything could
be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come
with a fare from London; and as he thought that the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into another might
be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he
determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any
other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone,
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding
out even so much as this.‚Äù



Chapter 48


The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.
His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion.
They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to
send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. Mr.
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.

When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,
to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as he could,
to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only
security for her husband's not being killed in a duel.

Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable
to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without
reporting some fresh instance of Wickham's extravagance or irregularity,
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found
them.

All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months
before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's family.
Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world;
and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the
appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above
half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of
her sister's ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less
of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come
when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely
despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of
them.

Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife received a
letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street;
that Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival,
but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now
determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself
did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was
eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that Mr.
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promised
to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:

‚ÄúI have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if
possible, from some of the young man's intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to
know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were
anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a
clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have
nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in
his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps,
Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any
other person.‚Äù

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her
authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information
of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never
heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both
of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of
his companions in the ----shire might be able to give more information;
and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application
was a something to look forward to.

Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious
part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters
was the grand object of every morning's impatience. Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated, and every
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.

But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence,
she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his
letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as
follows:

‚ÄúMY DEAR SIR,

‚ÄúI feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from
Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself
sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in
your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because
proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be
wanting on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune--or that
may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the
most afflicting to a parent's mind. The death of your daughter would
have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to
be lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte
informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has
proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time,
for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think
that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be
guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be,
you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined
by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to
whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that
this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of
all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says,
will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads
me moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event
of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved
in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to
console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child
from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her
own heinous offense.

‚ÄúI am, dear sir, etc., etc.‚Äù

Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer from
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.
It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship with whom he
kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one
living. His former acquaintances had been numerous; but since he
had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of
particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore,
who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the
wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for
secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia's relations, for
it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a
very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a
thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton.
He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more
formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars
from the Longbourn family. Jane heard them with horror. ‚ÄúA gamester!‚Äù
 she cried. ‚ÄúThis is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it.‚Äù

Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered
spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded
to his brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and
leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable
for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did
not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering
what her anxiety for his life had been before.

‚ÄúWhat, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?‚Äù she cried. ‚ÄúSure he
will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham,
and make him marry her, if he comes away?‚Äù

As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she
and the children should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet
came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.

Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her
Derbyshire friend that had attended her from that part of the world. His
name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and
the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their
being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had
received none since her return that could come from Pemberley.

The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for
the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
fairly conjectured from _that_, though Elizabeth, who was by this time
tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of
Lydia's infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought,
one sleepless night out of two.

When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him
away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of
it.

It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, ‚ÄúSay
nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing,
and I ought to feel it.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou must not be too severe upon yourself,‚Äù replied Elizabeth.

‚ÄúYou may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone
to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have
been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
It will pass away soon enough.‚Äù

‚ÄúDo you suppose them to be in London?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; where else can they be so well concealed?‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd Lydia used to want to go to London,‚Äù added Kitty.

‚ÄúShe is happy then,‚Äù said her father drily; ‚Äúand her residence there
will probably be of some duration.‚Äù

Then after a short silence he continued:

‚ÄúLizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me
last May, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.‚Äù

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother's
tea.

‚ÄúThis is a parade,‚Äù he cried, ‚Äúwhich does one good; it gives such an
elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my
library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as
I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am not going to run away, papa,‚Äù said Kitty fretfully. ‚ÄúIf I should
ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.‚Äù

‚Äú_You_ go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne
for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be cautious, and
you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter into
my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be
absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.
And you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you have
spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.‚Äù

Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.

‚ÄúWell, well,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúdo not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them.‚Äù



Chapter 49


Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper
coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to their
mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the expected summons,
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, ‚ÄúI beg your pardon,
madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.‚Äù

‚ÄúDear madam,‚Äù cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, ‚Äúdon't you know
there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here
this half-hour, and master has had a letter.‚Äù

Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the
library; their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the
butler, who said:

‚ÄúIf you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is walking towards the
little copse.‚Äù

Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once
more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.

Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath,
came up with him, and eagerly cried out:

‚ÄúOh, papa, what news--what news? Have you heard from my uncle?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes I have had a letter from him by express.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell, and what news does it bring--good or bad?‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat is there of good to be expected?‚Äù said he, taking the letter from
his pocket. ‚ÄúBut perhaps you would like to read it.‚Äù

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.

‚ÄúRead it aloud,‚Äù said their father, ‚Äúfor I hardly know myself what it is
about.‚Äù

‚ÄúGracechurch Street, Monday, August 2.

‚ÄúMY DEAR BROTHER,

‚ÄúAt last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as,
upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you
left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of
London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough
to know they are discovered. I have seen them both--‚Äù

‚ÄúThen it is as I always hoped,‚Äù cried Jane; ‚Äúthey are married!‚Äù

Elizabeth read on:

‚ÄúI have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there
was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the
engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will
not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure
to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand
pounds secured among your children after the decease of yourself and
my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her,
during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions
which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with,
as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by
express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You
will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham's
circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be.
The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there
will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to
settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude
will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout
the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to
Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the
smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at
Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as
fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it
best that my niece should be married from this house, of which I hope
you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as
anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,

‚ÄúEDW. GARDINER.‚Äù

‚ÄúIs it possible?‚Äù cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. ‚ÄúCan it be
possible that he will marry her?‚Äù

‚ÄúWickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him,‚Äù said her
sister. ‚ÄúMy dear father, I congratulate you.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd have you answered the letter?‚Äù cried Elizabeth.

‚ÄúNo; but it must be done soon.‚Äù

Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he
wrote.

‚ÄúOh! my dear father,‚Äù she cried, ‚Äúcome back and write immediately.
Consider how important every moment is in such a case.‚Äù

‚ÄúLet me write for you,‚Äù said Jane, ‚Äúif you dislike the trouble
yourself.‚Äù

‚ÄúI dislike it very much,‚Äù he replied; ‚Äúbut it must be done.‚Äù

And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.

‚ÄúAnd may I ask--‚Äù said Elizabeth; ‚Äúbut the terms, I suppose, must be
complied with.‚Äù

‚ÄúComplied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd they _must_ marry! Yet he is _such_ a man!‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there
are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how much money
your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever
to pay him.‚Äù

‚ÄúMoney! My uncle!‚Äù cried Jane, ‚Äúwhat do you mean, sir?‚Äù

‚ÄúI mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight a
temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am
gone.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is very true,‚Äù said Elizabeth; ‚Äúthough it had not occurred to me
before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh!
it must be my uncle's doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has
distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo,‚Äù said her father; ‚ÄúWickham's a fool if he takes her with a farthing
less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to think so ill of him,
in the very beginning of our relationship.‚Äù

‚ÄúTen thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
repaid?‚Äù

Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued
silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to the
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.

‚ÄúAnd they are really to be married!‚Äù cried Elizabeth, as soon as they
were by themselves. ‚ÄúHow strange this is! And for _this_ we are to be
thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!‚Äù

‚ÄúI comfort myself with thinking,‚Äù replied Jane, ‚Äúthat he certainly would
not marry Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind
uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children
of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand
pounds?‚Äù

‚ÄúIf he were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been,‚Äù said
Elizabeth, ‚Äúand how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall
exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has
not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never
be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is
actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now,
she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she
first sees my aunt!‚Äù

‚ÄúWe must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,‚Äù said
Jane: ‚ÄúI hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to
marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten.‚Äù

‚ÄúTheir conduct has been such,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, ‚Äúas neither you, nor
I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it.‚Äù

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make
it known to her. He was writing and, without raising his head, coolly
replied:

‚ÄúJust as you please.‚Äù

‚ÄúMay we take my uncle's letter to read to her?‚Äù

‚ÄúTake whatever you like, and get away.‚Äù

Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went up stairs
together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication
would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As
soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner's hope of Lydia's being soon
married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its
exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she
had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter
would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her
felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.

‚ÄúMy dear, dear Lydia!‚Äù she cried. ‚ÄúThis is delightful indeed! She will
be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen!
My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage
everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the
clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him
how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell,
Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear
Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!‚Äù

Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of
these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr.
Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under.

‚ÄúFor we must attribute this happy conclusion,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúin a great
measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to
assist Mr. Wickham with money.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell,‚Äù cried her mother, ‚Äúit is all very right; who should do it but
her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have
ever had anything from him, except a few presents. Well! I am so happy!
In a short time I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well
it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in
such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and
you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.‚Äù

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had
not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's delay, she observed,
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite
so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.

‚ÄúI will go to Meryton,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúas soon as I am dressed, and tell the
good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call
on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage.
An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do
anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you
heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.‚Äù

Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom.

Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was
no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in
looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could
be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had
feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had
gained.



Chapter 50


Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life that,
instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever
of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be
her husband might then have rested in its proper place.

He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone
should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he
was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance,
and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.

When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly
useless, for, of course, they were to have a son. The son was to join
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.
Bennet, for many years after Lydia's birth, had been certain that he
would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then
too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her
husband's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
income.

Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and
the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the
latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with
regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother,
though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would
be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present
arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her
through her mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had been very little within
that sum.

That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was
another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as
little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports
of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he
naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon
dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick
in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he
was indebted to his brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any
message to her.

The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate
speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent
philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage
of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant
farmhouse. But there was much to be talked of in marrying her; and the
good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had proceeded before from
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit
in this change of circumstances, because with such an husband her misery
was considered certain.

It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on this
happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her
triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object
of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and
servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a
proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or considering
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
importance.

‚ÄúHaye Park might do,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúif the Gouldings could quit it--or the
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is
too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for
Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.‚Äù

Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her: ‚ÄúMrs.
Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into _one_ house in this
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the
impudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.‚Äù

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm. It
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his
daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of
affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend
it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable
resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without which her
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she could believe
possible. She was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new
clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they
took place.

Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of
the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for
her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the
proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the
spot.

She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were
few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended;
but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister's
frailty would have mortified her so much--not, however, from any fear
of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate,
there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia's marriage been
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other
objection, would now be added an alliance and relationship of the
nearest kind with a man whom he so justly scorned.

From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The
wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his
feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a
blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she
hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no
longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that
she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they
should meet.

What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the
proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now
have been most gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she
doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he was mortal,
there must be a triumph.

She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and
temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved;
and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she
must have received benefit of greater importance.

But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what
connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
family.

How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence,
she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could
belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions
were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.

                          * * * * *

Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet's
acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal
purport of his letter was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the militia.

‚ÄúIt was greatly my wish that he should do so,‚Äù he added, ‚Äúas soon as
his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in
considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on
his account and my niece's. It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go into
the regulars; and among his former friends, there are still some who
are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an
ensigncy in General ----'s regiment, now quartered in the North. It
is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He
promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each
have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements,
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham
in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I
have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying
similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin
a list according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I
hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions,
and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment,
unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs.
Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she
leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to
you and her mother.--Yours, etc.,

‚ÄúE. GARDINER.‚Äù

Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal
from the ----shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet
was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being settled in the North,
just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company,
for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted
with everybody, and had so many favourites.

‚ÄúShe is so fond of Mrs. Forster,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúit will be quite shocking
to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she
likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General ----'s
regiment.‚Äù

His daughter's request, for such it might be considered, of being
admitted into her family again before she set off for the North,
received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth,
who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and
consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents,
urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their
mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show
her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the
North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent
his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that as soon as
the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was
surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and
had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would
have been the last object of her wishes.



Chapter 51


Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her
probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to
meet them at ----, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially,
who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister
must endure.

They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive
them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage drove up to
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,
anxious, uneasy.

Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and
welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile,
to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy with an
alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness.

Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite
so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely
opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet
was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy,
and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their
congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly
round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and
observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been
there.

Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners
were always so pleasing, that had his character and his marriage been
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had
not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down,
resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence
of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the
two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.

There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood,
with a good humoured ease which she felt very unable to equal in her
replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for
the world.

‚ÄúOnly think of its being three months,‚Äù she cried, ‚Äúsince I went away;
it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure
I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I
thought it would be very good fun if I was.‚Äù

Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked
expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, ‚ÄúOh! mamma, do the
people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not;
and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he
should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to him, and took
off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that
he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.‚Äù

Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to
the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with
anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her say
to her eldest sister, ‚ÄúAh! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go
lower, because I am a married woman.‚Äù

It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment
from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good
spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases, and
all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called ‚ÄúMrs. Wickham‚Äù
 by each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner to show her
ring, and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.

‚ÄúWell, mamma,‚Äù said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast
room, ‚Äúand what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I
am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half
my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get
husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go.‚Äù

‚ÄúVery true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don't
at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, lord! yes;--there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all
things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We
shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some
balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all.‚Äù

‚ÄúI should like it beyond anything!‚Äù said her mother.

‚ÄúAnd then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
winter is over.‚Äù

‚ÄúI thank you for my share of the favour,‚Äù said Elizabeth; ‚Äúbut I do not
particularly like your way of getting husbands.‚Äù

Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham
had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join
his regiment at the end of a fortnight.

No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and
she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and
having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to
all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did
think, than such as did not.

Wickham's affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected
to find it; not equal to Lydia's for him. She had scarcely needed her
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love, rather
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring
for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain
that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity
of having a companion.

Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did every
thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on
the first of September, than any body else in the country.

One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two
elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth:

‚ÄúLizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe. You
were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you
curious to hear how it was managed?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo really,‚Äù replied Elizabeth; ‚ÄúI think there cannot be too little said
on the subject.‚Äù

‚ÄúLa! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were
married, you know, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings were in
that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven
o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in
such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to
put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was
my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as
if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in
ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed
to know whether he would be married in his blue coat.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you'll believe
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure London was
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so
just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon
business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once
they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I
did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we
were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he
came back again in ten minutes' time, and then we all set out. However,
I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented going, the
wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well.‚Äù

‚ÄúMr. Darcy!‚Äù repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.

‚ÄúOh, yes!--he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious
me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised
them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!‚Äù

‚ÄúIf it was to be secret,‚Äù said Jane, ‚Äúsay not another word on the
subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! certainly,‚Äù said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; ‚Äúwe will
ask you no questions.‚Äù

‚ÄúThank you,‚Äù said Lydia, ‚Äúfor if you did, I should certainly tell you
all, and then Wickham would be angry.‚Äù

On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her
power, by running away.

But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least
it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at
her sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,
wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what
Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
intended.

‚ÄúYou may readily comprehend,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúwhat my curiosity must be
to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively
speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such
a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems
to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
ignorance.‚Äù

‚ÄúNot that I _shall_, though,‚Äù she added to herself, as she finished
the letter; ‚Äúand my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
out.‚Äù

Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad
of it;--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any
satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.



Chapter 52


Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as
soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it
than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to
be interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to
be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not
contain a denial.

‚ÄúGracechurch street, Sept. 6.

‚ÄúMY DEAR NIECE,

‚ÄúI have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning
to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing will not comprise
what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your
application; I did not expect it from _you_. Don't think me angry,
however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such
inquiries to be necessary on _your_ side. If you do not choose to
understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised
as I am--and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned
would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you are really
innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit.

‚ÄúOn the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most
unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with him several
hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so
dreadfully racked as _yours_ seems to have been. He came to tell Mr.
Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were,
and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly,
Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day
after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for
them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as to
make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide
in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and
confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private
actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He
called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy
an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he _had another_
motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days
in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to
direct his search, which was more than _we_ had; and the consciousness
of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.

‚ÄúThere is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago
governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause
of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large
house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting
lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with
Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to
town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and
corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found.
Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and had
she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up
their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the
wished-for direction. They were in ---- street. He saw Wickham, and
afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he
acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful
situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed
on to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go. But
he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared
for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear
of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or
other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings,
it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which,
in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learnt had never
been _his_ design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment,
on account of some debts of honour, which were very pressing; and
scrupled not to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia's flight on her
own folly alone. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and as
to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He
must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have
nothing to live on.

‚ÄúMr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once. Though
Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able
to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited by
marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still
cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in
some other country. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely
to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.

‚ÄúThey met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of
course wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be
reasonable.

‚ÄúEvery thing being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy's next step was to
make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch
street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not be
seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was
still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge
your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your
uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the
departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next
day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.

‚ÄúOn Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home,
and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.

‚ÄúThey met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It was not all
settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to
Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that
obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been
accused of many faults at different times, but _this_ is the true one.
Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and
I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your
uncle would most readily have settled the whole.

‚ÄúThey battled it together for a long time, which was more than either
the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle
was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his
niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it,
which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter
this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation
that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where
it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane
at most.

‚ÄúYou know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young
people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably
more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own
settled upon _her_, and his commission purchased. The reason why all
this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given above. It
was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that
Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he
had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth
in _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody's_ reserve,
can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking,
my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would
never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for _another
interest_ in the affair.

‚ÄúWhen all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who
were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in
London once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were
then to receive the last finish.

‚ÄúI believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which
you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not
afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant
admission to the house. _He_ was exactly what he had been, when I
knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was
satisfied with her behaviour while she staid with us, if I had not
perceived, by Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming
home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell
you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most
serious manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had
done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she
heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was
sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and
Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her.

‚ÄúMr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you,
attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave
town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my
dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold
enough to say before) how much I like him. His behaviour to us has,
in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. His
understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little
more liveliness, and _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his wife may teach
him. I thought him very sly;--he hardly ever mentioned your name. But
slyness seems the fashion.

‚ÄúPray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not
punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy
till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice little
pair of ponies, would be the very thing.

‚ÄúBut I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half
hour.

‚ÄúYours, very sincerely,

‚ÄúM. GARDINER.‚Äù

The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had
produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister's
match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too
great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the
pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true!
He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all
the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which
supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and
despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason
with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to
avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had
done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her
heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a hope shortly
checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her vanity
was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her--for
a woman who had already refused him--as able to overcome a sentiment so
natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law
of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. He had,
to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had
given a reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary
stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he had been
wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and
though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she
could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality for her might assist
his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially
concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were
under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They
owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to him. Oh!
how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever
encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For
herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a cause
of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of himself.
She read over her aunt's commendation of him again and again. It
was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some
pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she
and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted
between Mr. Darcy and herself.

She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one's
approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was
overtaken by Wickham.

‚ÄúI am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?‚Äù said he,
as he joined her.

‚ÄúYou certainly do,‚Äù she replied with a smile; ‚Äúbut it does not follow
that the interruption must be unwelcome.‚Äù

‚ÄúI should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends; and
now we are better.‚Äù

‚ÄúTrue. Are the others coming out?‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that
you have actually seen Pemberley.‚Äù

She replied in the affirmative.

‚ÄúI almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the
old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of
me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, she did.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd what did she say?‚Äù

‚ÄúThat you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned
out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely
misrepresented.‚Äù

‚ÄúCertainly,‚Äù he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had
silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:

‚ÄúI was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other
several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.‚Äù

‚ÄúPerhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,‚Äù said
Elizabeth. ‚ÄúIt must be something particular, to take him there at this
time of year.‚Äù

‚ÄúUndoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I
understood from the Gardiners that you had.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes; he introduced us to his sister.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd do you like her?‚Äù

‚ÄúVery much.‚Äù

‚ÄúI have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year
or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad
you liked her. I hope she will turn out well.‚Äù

‚ÄúI dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.‚Äù

‚ÄúDid you go by the village of Kympton?‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not recollect that we did.‚Äù

‚ÄúI mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A
most delightful place!--Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited
me in every respect.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow should you have liked making sermons?‚Äù

‚ÄúExceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty,
and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to
repine;--but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The
quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas
of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
circumstance, when you were in Kent?‚Äù

‚ÄúI have heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou have. Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the
first, you may remember.‚Äù

‚ÄúI _did_ hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not
so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
had been compromised accordingly.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember
what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.‚Äù

They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast
to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister's sake, to provoke him,
she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:

‚ÄúCome, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let
us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one
mind.‚Äù

She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.



Chapter 53


Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he
never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth,
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she
had said enough to keep him quiet.

The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was
forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth.

‚ÄúOh! my dear Lydia,‚Äù she cried, ‚Äúwhen shall we meet again?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.‚Äù

‚ÄúWrite to me very often, my dear.‚Äù

‚ÄúAs often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for
writing. My sisters may write to _me_. They will have nothing else to
do.‚Äù

Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than his wife's. He
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.

‚ÄúHe is as fine a fellow,‚Äù said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of
the house, ‚Äúas ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to
us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.‚Äù

The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days.

‚ÄúI often think,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúthat there is nothing so bad as parting with
one's friends. One seems so forlorn without them.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a daughter,‚Äù said
Elizabeth. ‚ÄúIt must make you better satisfied that your other four are
single.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married,
but only because her husband's regiment happens to be so far off. If
that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.‚Äù

But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly
relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an
article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper
at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her
master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several
weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and
smiled and shook her head by turns.

‚ÄúWell, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,‚Äù (for Mrs.
Phillips first brought her the news). ‚ÄúWell, so much the better. Not
that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am
sure _I_ never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome
to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what _may_ happen?
But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to
mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?‚Äù

‚ÄúYou may depend on it,‚Äù replied the other, ‚Äúfor Mrs. Nicholls was in
Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He
comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was
going to the butcher's, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.‚Äù

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing
colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said:

‚ÄúI saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present
report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don't imagine it was from
any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that
I _should_ be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect
me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes
alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of
_myself_, but I dread other people's remarks.‚Äù

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no
other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
there _with_ his friend's permission, or being bold enough to come
without it.

‚ÄúYet it is hard,‚Äù she sometimes thought, ‚Äúthat this poor man cannot
come to a house which he has legally hired, without raising all this
speculation! I _will_ leave him to himself.‚Äù

In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her
feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily
perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed,
more unequal, than she had often seen them.

The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,
about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.

‚ÄúAs soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, ‚Äúyou
will wait on him of course.‚Äù

‚ÄúNo, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I
went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again.‚Äù

His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to
Netherfield.

‚Äú'Tis an etiquette I despise,‚Äù said he. ‚ÄúIf he wants our society,
let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend my hours
in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back
again.‚Äù

‚ÄúWell, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait
on him. But, however, that shan't prevent my asking him to dine here, I
am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will
make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for
him.‚Äù

Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
husband's incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her
neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before
_they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,--

‚ÄúI begin to be sorry that he comes at all,‚Äù said Jane to her sister. ‚ÄúIt
would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference, but I can
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;
but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she
says. Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!‚Äù

‚ÄúI wish I could say anything to comfort you,‚Äù replied Elizabeth; ‚Äúbut it
is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction
of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have
always so much.‚Äù

Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants,
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety
and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. She counted
the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent;
hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his
arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him, from her dressing-room window,
enter the paddock and ride towards the house.

Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely
kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went
to the window--she looked,--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by her sister.

‚ÄúThere is a gentleman with him, mamma,‚Äù said Kitty; ‚Äúwho can it be?‚Äù

‚ÄúSome acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not
know.‚Äù

‚ÄúLa!‚Äù replied Kitty, ‚Äúit looks just like that man that used to be with
him before. Mr. what's-his-name. That tall, proud man.‚Äù

‚ÄúGood gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of
Mr. Bingley's will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must
say that I hate the very sight of him.‚Äù

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time
after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be
civil to him only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without being heard by either
of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be
suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew Mrs.
Gardiner's letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him.
To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,
and whose merit she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just as
what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming--at his
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,
was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered
behaviour in Derbyshire.

The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half a
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and
wishes must still be unshaken. But she would not be secure.

‚ÄúLet me first see how he behaves,‚Äù said she; ‚Äúit will then be early
enough for expectation.‚Äù

She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to
lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of
her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the
gentlemen's appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.

Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She
had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious, as usual; and,
she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as
she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother's
presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but
not an improbable, conjecture.

Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period
saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs.
Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed,
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
her curtsey and address to his friend.

Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter
the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy,
was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill
applied.

Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question
which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely anything. He
was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but
it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends,
when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed without
bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist
the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often
found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but
the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when
they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry
with herself for being so.

‚ÄúCould I expect it to be otherwise!‚Äù said she. ‚ÄúYet why did he come?‚Äù

She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to
him she had hardly courage to speak.

She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.

‚ÄúIt is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet.

He readily agreed to it.

‚ÄúI began to be afraid you would never come back again. People _did_ say
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope
it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood,
since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my
own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have
seen it in the papers. It was in The Times and The Courier, I know;
though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, 'Lately,
George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without there being a
syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything.
It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to
make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?‚Äù

Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth
dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could
not tell.

‚ÄúIt is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,‚Äù
 continued her mother, ‚Äúbut at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very
hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone down to
Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay
I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have
heard of his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the
regulars. Thank Heaven! he has _some_ friends, though perhaps not so
many as he deserves.‚Äù

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such
misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her,
however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually
done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in
the country at present. A few weeks, he believed.

‚ÄúWhen you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,‚Äù said her mother,
‚ÄúI beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Mr.
Bennet's manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the covies for you.‚Äù

Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious
attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had
flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt
that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for
moments of such painful confusion.

‚ÄúThe first wish of my heart,‚Äù said she to herself, ‚Äúis never more to
be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either
one or the other again!‚Äù

Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing
how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the admiration of her
former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little;
but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He
found her as handsome as she had been last year; as good natured, and
as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded
that she talked as much as ever. But her mind was so busily engaged,
that she did not always know when she was silent.

When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
Longbourn in a few days time.

‚ÄúYou are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley,‚Äù she added, ‚Äúfor when
you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with
us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure
you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep
your engagement.‚Äù

Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.

Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did
not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man
on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride
of one who had ten thousand a year.



Chapter 54


As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits;
or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that
must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her.

‚ÄúWhy, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,‚Äù said she,
‚Äúdid he come at all?‚Äù

She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.

‚ÄúHe could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when
he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If
he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will
think no more about him.‚Äù

Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach
of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which showed her
better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.

‚ÄúNow,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúthat this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly
easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by
his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly
seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent
acquaintance.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, very indifferent indeed,‚Äù said Elizabeth, laughingly. ‚ÄúOh, Jane,
take care.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?‚Äù

‚ÄúI think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with
you as ever.‚Äù

                          * * * * *

They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good
humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, had
revived.

On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality
as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take
the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by
her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore
to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
decided. He placed himself by her.

Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend.
He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that
Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes
likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing
alarm.

His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an
admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded
Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and his
own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the
consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It
gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in
no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table
could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to
advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother's ungraciousness,
made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth's mind;
and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell
him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the
family.

She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than
the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious
and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the
gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her
uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all
her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.

‚ÄúIf he does not come to me, _then_,‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI shall give him up for
ever.‚Äù

The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have
answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table,
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her
which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:

‚ÄúThe men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;
do we?‚Äù

Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with
her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough
to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for
being so silly!

‚ÄúA man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to
expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?
There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!‚Äù

She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee cup
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:

‚ÄúIs your sister at Pemberley still?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, she will remain there till Christmas.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd quite alone? Have all her friends left her?‚Äù

‚ÄúMrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough,
these three weeks.‚Äù

She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse
with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering
to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the ladies
all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him,
when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her
mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.

Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.

‚ÄúWell girls,‚Äù said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, ‚ÄúWhat
say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well,
I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said they never saw so
fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the
Lucases' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French
cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater
beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And
what do you think she said besides? 'Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her
at Netherfield at last.' She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good
a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls,
and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of
Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would get him at
last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at
not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.

‚ÄúIt has been a very agreeable day,‚Äù said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. ‚ÄúThe
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we
may often meet again.‚Äù

Elizabeth smiled.

‚ÄúLizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me.
I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am
perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had
any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed
with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
pleasing, than any other man.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are very cruel,‚Äù said her sister, ‚Äúyou will not let me smile, and
are provoking me to it every moment.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow hard it is in some cases to be believed!‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd how impossible in others!‚Äù

‚ÄúBut why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to
instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your confidante.‚Äù



Chapter 55


A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.

‚ÄúNext time you call,‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI hope we shall be more lucky.‚Äù

He should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she would
give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.

‚ÄúCan you come to-morrow?‚Äù

Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was
accepted with alacrity.

He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them
dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughter's room, in her dressing
gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out:

‚ÄúMy dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bingley is
come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss
Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss
Lizzy's hair.‚Äù

‚ÄúWe will be down as soon as we can,‚Äù said Jane; ‚Äúbut I dare say Kitty is
forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour ago.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be quick!
Where is your sash, my dear?‚Äù

But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down
without one of her sisters.

The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the
evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of
the five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, ‚ÄúWhat is the matter mamma? What do
you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?‚Äù

‚ÄúNothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you.‚Äù She then sat still
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, ‚ÄúCome here, my love, I want to
speak to you,‚Äù took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look
at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her
entreaty that _she_ would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs.
Bennet half-opened the door and called out:

‚ÄúLizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.‚Äù

Elizabeth was forced to go.

‚ÄúWe may as well leave them by themselves you know;‚Äù said her mother, as
soon as she was in the hall. ‚ÄúKitty and I are going up stairs to sit in
my dressing-room.‚Äù

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
into the drawing-room.

Mrs. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was every
thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter. His
ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their
evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the
mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command
of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.

He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went
away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs.
Bennet's means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.

After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in
the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably
persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman's
concurrence.

Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent
the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more
agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption
or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the
other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner;
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was again at work to get
every body away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter
to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea;
for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be
wanted to counteract her mother's schemes.

But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she
saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother
had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her
sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in
earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of
both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would
have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but _hers_ she
thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and
Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as
well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few
words to her sister, ran out of the room.

Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give
pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest
emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.

‚Äú'Tis too much!‚Äù she added, ‚Äúby far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh!
why is not everybody as happy?‚Äù

Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth,
a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be
said for the present.

‚ÄúI must go instantly to my mother;‚Äù she cried. ‚ÄúI would not on any
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family! how shall I bear so much happiness!‚Äù

She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the
card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.

Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many
previous months of suspense and vexation.

‚ÄúAnd this,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúis the end of all his friend's anxious
circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the
happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!‚Äù

In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her
father had been short and to the purpose.

‚ÄúWhere is your sister?‚Äù said he hastily, as he opened the door.

‚ÄúWith my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.‚Äù

He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes
and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed
her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen
to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane's perfections;
and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and
himself.

It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of
Miss Bennet's mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to her face, as
made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent or
speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings,
though she talked to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
how really happy he was.

Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he
turned to his daughter, and said:

‚ÄúJane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.‚Äù

Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
goodness.

‚ÄúYou are a good girl;‚Äù he replied, ‚Äúand I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your
doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will
always exceed your income.‚Äù

‚ÄúI hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be
unpardonable in me.‚Äù

‚ÄúExceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,‚Äù cried his wife, ‚Äúwhat are you
talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely
more.‚Äù Then addressing her daughter, ‚ÄúOh! my dear, dear Jane, I am so
happy! I am sure I shan't get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it
would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was
that you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!‚Äù

Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her
favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her younger
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness
which she might in future be able to dispense.

Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.

Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after
supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough
detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he thought himself
obliged to accept.

Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for
while he was present, Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else;
but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those hours
of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he
always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of
her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of
relief.

‚ÄúHe has made me so happy,‚Äù said she, one evening, ‚Äúby telling me that he
was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed
it possible.‚Äù

‚ÄúI suspected as much,‚Äù replied Elizabeth. ‚ÄúBut how did he account for
it?‚Äù

‚ÄúIt must have been his sister's doing. They were certainly no friends to
his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see,
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we
can never be what we once were to each other.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is the most unforgiving speech,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúthat I ever
heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again
the dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard.‚Äù

‚ÄúWould you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November,
he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being
indifferent would have prevented his coming down again!‚Äù

‚ÄúHe made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
modesty.‚Äù

This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and
the little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was pleased
to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for,
though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she
knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him.

‚ÄúI am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!‚Äù cried
Jane. ‚ÄúOh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all! If I could but see _you_ as happy! If there _were_ but
such another man for you!‚Äù

‚ÄúIf you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as
you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your
happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.‚Äù

The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a
secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips,
and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
neighbours in Meryton.

The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the
world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.



Chapter 56


One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane had been
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up
the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, the
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that
somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the
shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
open and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.

They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.

She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no
other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of the
head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her
name to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made.

Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting
for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,

‚ÄúI hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your
mother.‚Äù

Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.

‚ÄúAnd _that_ I suppose is one of your sisters.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, madam,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to Lady Catherine.
‚ÄúShe is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married,
and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man
who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou have a very small park here,‚Äù returned Lady Catherine after a short
silence.

‚ÄúIt is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I
assure you it is much larger than Sir William Lucas's.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in
summer; the windows are full west.‚Äù

Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner, and then
added:

‚ÄúMay I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. and
Mrs. Collins well.‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, very well. I saw them the night before last.‚Äù

Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no
letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.

Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,

‚ÄúMiss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness
on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you
will favour me with your company.‚Äù

‚ÄúGo, my dear,‚Äù cried her mother, ‚Äúand show her ladyship about the
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.‚Äù

Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol,
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the
hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent
looking rooms, walked on.

Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for
conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and
disagreeable.

‚ÄúHow could I ever think her like her nephew?‚Äù said she, as she looked in
her face.

As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following
manner:--

‚ÄúYou can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I
come.‚Äù

Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

‚ÄúIndeed, you are mistaken, Madam. I have not been at all able to account
for the honour of seeing you here.‚Äù

‚ÄúMiss Bennet,‚Äù replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, ‚Äúyou ought to
know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere _you_ may
choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such
moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most
alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told that not only your
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that
you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon
afterwards united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I
_know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved
on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to
you.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf you believed it impossible to be true,‚Äù said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, ‚ÄúI wonder you took the trouble of coming
so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?‚Äù

‚ÄúAt once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,‚Äù said Elizabeth
coolly, ‚Äúwill be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report
is in existence.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?‚Äù

‚ÄúI never heard that it was.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?‚Äù

‚ÄúI do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship. You may
ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has
he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?‚Äù

‚ÄúYour ladyship has declared it to be impossible.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his
reason. But your arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,
have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You
may have drawn him in.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.‚Äù

‚ÄúMiss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such
language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world,
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as this,
ever induce me to be explicit.‚Äù

‚ÄúLet me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is
engaged to my daughter. Now what have you to say?‚Äù

‚ÄúOnly this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will
make an offer to me.‚Äù

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:

‚ÄúThe engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy,
they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of
_his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we planned
the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would
be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his
tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his earliest
hours he was destined for his cousin?‚Äù

‚ÄúYes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is
no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not
be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to
marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither
by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?‚Äù

‚ÄúBecause honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes,
Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will
be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him.
Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned
by any of us.‚Äù

‚ÄúThese are heavy misfortunes,‚Äù replied Elizabeth. ‚ÄúBut the wife of Mr.
Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
to repine.‚Äù

‚ÄúObstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude
for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that
score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came
here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will
I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person's
whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.‚Äù

‚Äú_That_ will make your ladyship's situation at present more pitiable;
but it will have no effect on me.‚Äù

‚ÄúI will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient--though untitled--families. Their fortune on
both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?
The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections,
or fortune. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you
were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in
which you have been brought up.‚Äù

‚ÄúIn marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that
sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman's daughter; so far we are
equal.‚Äù

‚ÄúTrue. You _are_ a gentleman's daughter. But who was your mother?
Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their
condition.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhatever my connections may be,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúif your nephew does
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.‚Äù

‚ÄúTell me once for all, are you engaged to him?‚Äù

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a
moment's deliberation:

‚ÄúI am not.‚Äù

Lady Catherine seemed pleased.

‚ÄúAnd will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?‚Äù

‚ÄúI will make no promise of the kind.‚Äù

‚ÄúMiss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more
reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that
I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into
anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make their
marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would
my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin?
Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have
supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the
application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if
you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your
nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell;
but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg,
therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject.‚Äù

‚ÄúNot so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am
no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous
elopement. I know it all; that the young man's marrying her was a
patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is
such a girl to be my nephew's sister? Is her husband, is the son of his
late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of what are
you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?‚Äù

‚ÄúYou can now have nothing further to say,‚Äù she resentfully answered.
‚ÄúYou have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg to return to
the house.‚Äù

And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.

‚ÄúYou have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you
must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?‚Äù

‚ÄúLady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou are then resolved to have him?‚Äù

‚ÄúI have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner,
which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without
reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.‚Äù

‚ÄúNeither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,‚Äù replied Elizabeth, ‚Äúhave any
possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the
resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former
_were_ excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment's
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well.
I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your
ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you
reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point.‚Äù

In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of
the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, ‚ÄúI take no leave
of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve
no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.‚Äù

Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.

‚ÄúShe did not choose it,‚Äù said her daughter, ‚Äúshe would go.‚Äù

‚ÄúShe is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously
civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were
well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing through
Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?‚Äù

Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.



Chapter 57


The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report
of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;
till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply
the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her
sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours
at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the
Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had
only set that down as almost certain and immediate, which she had looked
forward to as possible at some future time.

In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting
in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to
prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate
an application to her nephew; and how _he_ might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her, she dared
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose
that he thought much higher of her ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_,
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would
address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.

If he had been wavering before as to what he should do, which had often
seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.

‚ÄúIf, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his
friend within a few days,‚Äù she added, ‚ÄúI shall know how to understand
it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him
at all.‚Äù

                          * * * * *

The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had
been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same
kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.

The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.

‚ÄúLizzy,‚Äù said he, ‚ÄúI was going to look for you; come into my room.‚Äù

She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to
tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it
might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the
consequent explanations.

She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He
then said,

‚ÄúI have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its
contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink
of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.‚Äù

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to
herself; when her father continued:

‚ÄúYou look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity, to discover the
name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins.‚Äù

‚ÄúFrom Mr. Collins! and what can _he_ have to say?‚Äù

‚ÄúSomething very much to the purpose of course. He begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says
on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows: 'Having thus
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another;
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may
be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in
this land.'

‚ÄúCan you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? 'This young
gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of
mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive
patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin
Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate
closure with this gentleman's proposals, which, of course, you will be
inclined to take immediate advantage of.'

‚ÄúHave you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out:

‚Äú'My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine
that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with
a friendly eye.'

‚Äú_Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie
more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his
life! It is admirable!‚Äù

Elizabeth tried to join in her father's pleasantry, but could only force
one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so
little agreeable to her.

‚ÄúAre you not diverted?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! yes. Pray read on.‚Äù

‚Äú'After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last
night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some
family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her
consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty
to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and
her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.' Mr.
Collins moreover adds, 'I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place should be so generally
known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain
from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young
couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them,
as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
names to be mentioned in your hearing.' That is his notion of Christian
forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte's
situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you
look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be _missish_,
I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we
live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our
turn?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh!‚Äù cried Elizabeth, ‚ÄúI am excessively diverted. But it is so
strange!‚Äù

‚ÄúYes--_that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference, and _your_
pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate
writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for any
consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?‚Äù

To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had
been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by
his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she
would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by
what he said of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and she could do nothing but
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of
his seeing too little, she might have fancied too much.



Chapter 58


Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine's
visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time
to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat
in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed
their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the
habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five
set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others
to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy
were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty
was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a
desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same.

They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,
when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the
moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was
high, she immediately said:

‚ÄúMr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving
relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding yours. I
can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my
poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest
of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am sorry, exceedingly sorry,‚Äù replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise
and emotion, ‚Äúthat you have ever been informed of what may, in a
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner
was so little to be trusted.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first betrayed to
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
sake of discovering them.‚Äù

‚ÄúIf you _will_ thank me,‚Äù he replied, ‚Äúlet it be for yourself alone.
That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your
_family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought
only of _you_.‚Äù

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause,
her companion added, ‚ÄúYou are too generous to trifle with me. If your
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. _My_
affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence
me on this subject for ever.‚Äù

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not
very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone
so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as to make
her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The
happiness which this reply produced, was such as he had probably never
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth
been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the
expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over his face, became him;
but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told her of
feelings, which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his
affection every moment more valuable.

They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to
be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on
every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship's apprehension,
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that
such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise
from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily for her
ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.

‚ÄúIt taught me to hope,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúas I had scarcely ever allowed myself
to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain that,
had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly.‚Äù

Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, ‚ÄúYes, you know enough
of my frankness to believe me capable of _that_. After abusing you so
abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all
your relations.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my
behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was
unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.‚Äù

‚ÄúWe will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening,‚Äù said Elizabeth. ‚ÄúThe conduct of neither, if strictly examined,
will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improved
in civility.‚Äù

‚ÄúI cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your
reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: 'had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.' Those were your words. You know not, you can
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me;--though it was some time,
I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.‚Äù

‚ÄúI was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such
a way.‚Äù

‚ÄúI can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper
feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never
forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible
way that would induce you to accept me.‚Äù

‚ÄúOh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at
all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.‚Äù

Darcy mentioned his letter. ‚ÄúDid it,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúdid it soon make you
think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its
contents?‚Äù

She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually all her
former prejudices had been removed.

‚ÄúI knew,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúthat what I wrote must give you pain, but it was
necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part
especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the
power of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might
justly make you hate me.‚Äù

‚ÄúThe letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhen I wrote that letter,‚Äù replied Darcy, ‚ÄúI believed myself perfectly
calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit.‚Äù

‚ÄúThe letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings
of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now
so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant
circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some
of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure.‚Äù

‚ÄúI cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
innocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude
which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled. I have been a selfish
being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I
was taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I
was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), I was spoilt
by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all
that was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught
me to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own family
circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least
to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I
was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still have been
but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You
taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you,
I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception.
You showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman
worthy of being pleased.‚Äù

‚ÄúHad you then persuaded yourself that I should?‚Äù

‚ÄúIndeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be
wishing, expecting my addresses.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure
you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me
wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_ evening?‚Äù

‚ÄúHate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began to take
a proper direction.‚Äù

‚ÄúI am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met at
Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?‚Äù

‚ÄúNo indeed; I felt nothing but surprise.‚Äù

‚ÄúYour surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you.
My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I
confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy object then,‚Äù replied Darcy, ‚Äúwas to show you, by every civility in
my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to
obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you
see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes
introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an
hour after I had seen you.‚Äù

He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of her
disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness
there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend.

She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to
each, to be dwelt on farther.

After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know
anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that
it was time to be at home.

‚ÄúWhat could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!‚Äù was a wonder which
introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted with
their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of
it.

‚ÄúI must ask whether you were surprised?‚Äù said Elizabeth.

‚ÄúNot at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.‚Äù

‚ÄúThat is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.‚Äù And
though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much
the case.

‚ÄúOn the evening before my going to London,‚Äù said he, ‚ÄúI made a
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I
told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his
affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent
to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.‚Äù

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his
friend.

‚ÄúDid you speak from your own observation,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúwhen you told him
that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?‚Äù

‚ÄúFrom the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits
which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of her affection.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to
him.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but
his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to confess
one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not
allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained
in any doubt of your sister's sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me
now.‚Äù

Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful
friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked
herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at,
and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness
of Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they
parted.



Chapter 59


‚ÄúMy dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?‚Äù was a question
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room,
and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to
say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own
knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.

The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent.
Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth;
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,
there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt
in the family when her situation became known; she was aware that no
one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.

At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far
from Miss Bennet's general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.

‚ÄúYou are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!--engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no,
you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.‚Äù

‚ÄúThis is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and
I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am
in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are
engaged.‚Äù

Jane looked at her doubtingly. ‚ÄúOh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much
you dislike him.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I
did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as
these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever
remember it myself.‚Äù

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
seriously assured her of its truth.

‚ÄúGood Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,‚Äù cried
Jane. ‚ÄúMy dear, dear Lizzy, I would--I do congratulate you--but are you
certain? forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be
happy with him?‚Äù

‚ÄúThere can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that
we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased,
Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?‚Äù

‚ÄúVery, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more
delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you
really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than
marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought
to do?‚Äù

‚ÄúOh, yes! You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do, when I
tell you all.‚Äù

‚ÄúWhat do you mean?‚Äù

‚ÄúWhy, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am
afraid you will be angry.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy dearest sister, now _be_ serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let
me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me
how long you have loved him?‚Äù

‚ÄúIt has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began.
But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds
at Pemberley.‚Äù

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances
of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
further to wish.

‚ÄúNow I am quite happy,‚Äù said she, ‚Äúfor you will be as happy as myself.
I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you,
I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and your
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But
Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know
of it to another, not to you.‚Äù

Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling
to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made
her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer
conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage. All was acknowledged,
and half the night spent in conversation.

                          * * * * *

‚ÄúGood gracious!‚Äù cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next
morning, ‚Äúif that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with
our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always
coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or
other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him?
Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley's
way.‚Äù

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet
was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an
epithet.

As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, ‚ÄúMrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?‚Äù

‚ÄúI advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,‚Äù said Mrs. Bennet, ‚Äúto walk
to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has
never seen the view.‚Äù

‚ÄúIt may do very well for the others,‚Äù replied Mr. Bingley; ‚Äúbut I am
sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?‚Äù Kitty owned that
she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see
the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went
up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying:

‚ÄúI am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is
all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking
to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to
inconvenience.‚Äù

During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should be
asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother's. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit
to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear
the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her
disapprobation.

                          * * * * *

In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw
Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was
extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was going to
be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means--that _she_,
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her--was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, ‚ÄúGo to your father, he
wants you in the library.‚Äù She was gone directly.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
‚ÄúLizzy,‚Äù said he, ‚Äúwhat are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be
accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?‚Äù

How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more
reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;
but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion,
of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.

‚ÄúOr, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.
But will they make you happy?‚Äù

‚ÄúHave you any other objection,‚Äù said Elizabeth, ‚Äúthan your belief of my
indifference?‚Äù

‚ÄúNone at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but
this would be nothing if you really liked him.‚Äù

‚ÄúI do, I do like him,‚Äù she replied, with tears in her eyes, ‚ÄúI love him.
Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not
know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in
such terms.‚Äù

‚ÄúLizzy,‚Äù said her father, ‚ÄúI have given him my consent. He is the kind
of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he
condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on
having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know
your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
_you_ unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are
about.‚Äù

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and
at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object
of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of
him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection
was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months'
suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did
conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.

‚ÄúWell, my dear,‚Äù said he, when she ceased speaking, ‚ÄúI have no more to
say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with
you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.‚Äù

To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy
had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.

‚ÄúThis is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing;
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him
his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble
and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and _would_ have
paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own
way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.‚Äù

He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading
Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her
at last to go--saying, as she quitted the room, ‚ÄúIf any young men come
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.‚Äù

Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after
half an hour's quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join
the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time.

When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her,
and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary;
for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to
utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could
comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit
what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

‚ÄúGood gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would
have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich
and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages
you will have! Jane's is nothing to it--nothing at all. I am so
pleased--so happy. Such a charming man!--so handsome! so tall!--Oh, my
dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I
hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing
that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh,
Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted.‚Äù

This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,
soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room,
her mother followed her.

‚ÄúMy dearest child,‚Äù she cried, ‚ÄúI can think of nothing else! Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a
special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But
my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of,
that I may have it to-morrow.‚Äù

This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman
himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain
possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations'
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to
him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her
deference for his opinion.

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get
acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising
every hour in his esteem.

‚ÄúI admire all my three sons-in-law highly,‚Äù said he. ‚ÄúWickham, perhaps,
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well
as Jane's.‚Äù



Chapter 60


Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. ‚ÄúHow could
you begin?‚Äù said she. ‚ÄúI can comprehend your going on charmingly, when
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
place?‚Äù

‚ÄúI cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
knew that I _had_ begun.‚Äù

‚ÄúMy beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now be sincere;
did you admire me for my impertinence?‚Äù

‚ÄúFor the liveliness of your mind, I did.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less.
The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused, and
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really
amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for
it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me--but nobody thinks
of _that_ when they fall in love.‚Äù

‚ÄúWas there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was
ill at Netherfield?‚Äù

‚ÄúDearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it
by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling
to come to the point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first
called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did
you look as if you did not care about me?‚Äù

‚ÄúBecause you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.‚Äù

‚ÄúBut I was embarrassed.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd so was I.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.‚Äù

‚ÄúA man who had felt less, might.‚Äù

‚ÄúHow unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you
_would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when
you _would_ have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution of
thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.
_Too much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject. This will never do.‚Äù

‚ÄúYou need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady
Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of
removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to
your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour
to wait for any opening of yours. My aunt's intelligence had given me
hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing.‚Äù

‚ÄúLady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,
for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to
Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
or had you intended any more serious consequence?‚Äù

‚ÄúMy real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to
myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley,
and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.‚Äù

‚ÄúShall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to
befall her?‚Äù

‚ÄúI am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But it
ought to be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be
done directly.‚Äù

‚ÄúAnd if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But
I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.‚Äù

From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy
had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's
long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and
aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
follows:

‚ÄúI would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,
for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say the
truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.
But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to your
fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the
subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you
cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a
great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again,
for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your
idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I
am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
before, but not one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours, etc.‚Äù

Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and still
different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply
to his last.

‚ÄúDEAR SIR,

‚ÄúI must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon
be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can.
But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give.

‚ÄúYours sincerely, etc.‚Äù

Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching
marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even
to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her
former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was
affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing
her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved.

The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information,
was as sincere as her brother's in sending it. Four sides of paper were
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
being loved by her sister.

Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this
sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered
so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter, that
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of
her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even
listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure. If he did
shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.

Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his
forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good
humour encouraged, yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be vulgar.
Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all
likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield
him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep
him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse
without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising
from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it
added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to
the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing
to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at
Pemberley.



Chapter 61


Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got
rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride
she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may
be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many
of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it
was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity
in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and
invariably silly.

Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her
drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in
going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.

Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
_his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. The darling wish of his
sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county
to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.

Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with
her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally
known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a
temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example,
she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia's
society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.

Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite
unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no
longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own,
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without
much reluctance.

As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that
Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude
and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and in spite of every
thing, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on
to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received
from Lydia on her marriage, explained to her that, by his wife at least,
if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this
effect:

‚ÄúMY DEAR LIZZY,

‚ÄúI wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear
Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so
rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us.
I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not
think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help.
Any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year; but however,
do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.

‚ÄúYours, etc.‚Äù

As it happened that Elizabeth had _much_ rather not, she endeavoured in
her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
of what might be called economy in her own private expences, she
frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance
towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap
situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection for
her soon sunk into indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
reputation which her marriage had given her.

Though Darcy could never receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for
Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him further in his profession. Lydia was
occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself
in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently
staid so long, that even Bingley's good humour was overcome, and he
proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone.

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but as she
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she
dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as
attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
to Elizabeth.

Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters
was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each
other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with
an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of
talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen
in her way. By Elizabeth's instructions, she began to comprehend that
a woman may take liberties with her husband which a brother will not
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.

Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in
her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time
all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion,
he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity
to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait
on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.

With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***

***** This file should be named 1342-0.txt or 1342-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/4/1342/

Produced by Anonymous Volunteers

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (‚Äúthe Foundation‚Äù
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù appears, or with which the phrase ‚ÄúProject
Gutenberg‚Äù is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase ‚ÄúProject Gutenberg‚Äù associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
‚ÄúPlain Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original ‚ÄúPlain Vanilla ASCII‚Äù or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, ‚ÄúInformation about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.‚Äù

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
‚ÄúDefects,‚Äù such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the ‚ÄúRight
of Replacement or Refund‚Äù described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Koran as translated by Rodwell
The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Q'uran as translated by Rodwell

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.

*It must legally be the first thing seen when opening the book.*
In fact, our legal advisors said we can't even change margins.

**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Title: The Koran

Translator: J.M. Rodwell

September, 2001  [Etext #2800]
[Most recently updated: November 12, 2004]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Koran, as translated by Rodwell
The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Q'uran as translated by Rodwell
*******This file should be named 2800.txt or 2800.zip*******

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp metalab.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99 or etext00 through etext01, etc.
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

We are planning on making some changes in our donation structure
in 2000, so you might want to email me, hart@pobox.com beforehand.




*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Koran



TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC BY THE REV. J.M. RODWELL, M.A.  WITH AN
INTRODUCTION BY THE REV. G. MARGOLIOUTH, M.A.



Introduction Preface Index

Sura Number (this edition) Sura Number (Arabic text) Title

1    96      Thick Blood or Clots of Blood
2    74      The Enwrapped
3    73      The Enfolded
4    93      The Brightness
5    94      The Opening
6    113     The Daybreak
7    114     Men
8    1       Sura I.
9    109     Unbelievers
10   112     The Unity
11   111     Abu Lahab
12   108     The Abundance
13   104     The Backbiter
14   107     Religion
15   102     Desire
16   92      The Night
17   68      The Pen
18   90      The Soil
19   105     The Elephant
20   106     The Koreisch
21   97      Power
22   86      The Night-Comer
23   91      The Sun
24   80      He Frowned
25   87      The Most High
26   95      The Fig
27   103     The Afternoon
28   85      The Starry
29   101     The Blow
30   99      The Earthquake
31   82      The Cleaving
32   81      The Folded Up
33   84      The Splitting Asunder
34   100     The Chargers
35   79      Those Who Drag Forth
36   77      The Sent
37   78      The News
38   88      The Overshadowing
39   89      The Daybreak
40   75      The Resurrection
41   83      Those Who Stint
42   69      The Inevitable
43   51      The Scattering
44   52      The Mountain
45   56      The Inevitable
46   53      The Star
47   70      The Steps or Ascents
48   55      The Merciful
49   54      The Moon
50   37      The Ranks
51   71      Noah
52   76      Man
53   44      Smoke
54   50      Kaf
55   20      Ta. Ha.
56   26      The Poets
57   15      Hedjr
58   19      Mary
59   38      Sad
60   36      Ya. Sin
61   43      Ornaments of Gold
62   72      Djinn
63   67      The Kingdom
64   23      The Believers
65   21      The Prophets
66   25      Al Furkan
67   17      The Night Journey
68   27      The Ant
69   18      The Cave
70   32      Adoration
71   41      The Made Plain
72   45      The Kneeling
73   16      The Bee
74   30      The Greeks
75   11      Houd
76   14      Abraham, On Whom Be Peace
77   12      Joseph, Peace Be On Him
78   40      The Believer
79   28      The Story
80   39      The Troops
81   29      The Spider
82   31      Lokman
83   42      Counsel
84   10      Jonah, Peace Be On Him!
85   34      Saba
86   35      The Creator, or The Angels
87   7       Al Araf
88   46      Al Ahkaf
89   6       Cattle
90   13      Thunder
91   2       The Cow
92   98      Clear Evidence
93   64      Mutual Deceit
94   62      The Assembly
95   8       The Spoils
96   47      Muhammad
97   3       The Family of Imran
98   61      Battle Array
99   57      Iron
100  4       Women
101  65      Divorce
102  59      The Emigration
103  33      The Confederates
104  63      The Hypocrites
105  24      Light
106  58      She Who Pleaded
107  22      The Pilgrimage
108  48      The Victory
109  66      The Forbidding
110  60      She Who Is Tried
111  110     HELP
112  49      The Apartments
113  9       Immunity
114  5       The Table


MOHAMMED was born at Mecca in A.D. 567 or 569.  His flight (hijra) to Medina,
which marks the beginning of the Mohammedan era, took place on 16th June 622.
He died on 7th June 632.



INTRODUCTION

THE Koran admittedly occupies an important position among the great religious
books of the world. Though the youngest of the epoch-making works belonging
to this class of literature, it yields to hardly any in the wonderful effect
which it has produced on large masses of men. It has created an all but new
phase of human thought and a fresh type of character. It first transformed a
number of heterogeneous desert tribes of the Arabian peninsula into a nation
of heroes, and then proceeded to create the vast politico-religious
organisations of the Muhammedan world which are one of the great forces with
which Europe and the East have to reckon to-day.

The secret of the power exercised by the book, of course, lay in the mind
which produced it. It was, in fact, at first not a book, but a strong living
voice, a kind of wild authoritative proclamation, a series of admonitions,
promises, threats, and instructions addressed to turbulent and largely
hostile assemblies of untutored Arabs. As a book it was published after the
prophet's death. In Muhammed's life-time there were only disjointed notes,
speeches, and the retentive memories of those who listened to them. To speak
of the Koran is, therefore, practically the same as speaking of Muhammed, and
in trying to appraise the religious value of the book one is at the same time
attempting to form an opinion of the prophet himself. It would indeed be
difficult to find another case in which there is such a complete identity
between the literary work and the mind of the man who produced it.

That widely different estimates have been formed of Muhammed is well-known.
To Moslems he is, of course, the prophet par excellence, and the Koran is
regarded by the orthodox as nothing less than the eternal utterance of Allah.
The eulogy pronounced by Carlyle on Muhammed in Heroes and Hero Worship will
probably be endorsed by not a few at the present day. The extreme contrary
opinion, which in a fresh form has recently been revived1 by an able writer,
is hardly likely to find much lasting support. The correct view very probably
lies between the two extremes. The relative value of any given system of
religious thought must depend on the amount of truth which it embodies as
well as on the ethical standard which its adherents are bidden to follow.
Another important test is the degree of originality that is to be assigned to
it, for it can manifestly only claim credit for that which is new in it, not
for that which it borrowed from other systems.

With regard to the first-named criterion, there is a growing opinion among
students of religious history that Muhammed may in a real sense be regarded
as a prophet of certain truths, though by no means of truth in the absolute
meaning of the term. The shortcomings of the moral teaching contained in the
Koran are striking enough if judged from the highest ethical standpoint with
which we are acquainted; but a much more favourable view is arrived at if a
comparison is made between the ethics of the Koran and the moral tenets of
Arabian and other forms of heathenism which it supplanted.

The method followed by Muhammed in the promulgation of the Koran also
requires to be treated with discrimination. From the first flash of prophetic
inspiration which is clearly discernible in the earlier portions of the book
he, later on, frequently descended to deliberate invention and artful
rhetoric. He, in fact, accommodated his moral sense to the circumstances in
which the r\oc\le he had to play involved him.

On the question of originality there can hardly be two opinions now that the
Koran has been thoroughly compared with the Christian and Jewish traditions
of the time; and it is, besides some original Arabian legends, to those only
that the book stands in any close relationship. The matter is for the most
part borrowed, but the manner is all the prophet's own. This is emphatically
a case in which originality consists not so much in the creation of new
materials of thought as in the manner in which existing traditions of various
kinds are utilised and freshly blended to suit the special exigencies of the
occasion. Biblical reminiscences, Rabbinic legends, Christian traditions
mostly drawn from distorted apocryphal sources, and native heathen stories,
all first pass through the prophet's fervid mind, and thence issue in strange
new forms, tinged with poetry and enthusiasm, and well adapted to enforce his
own view of life and duty, to serve as an encouragement to his faithful
adherents, and to strike terror into the hearts of his opponents.

There is, however, apart from its religious value, a more general view from
which the book should be considered. The Koran enjoys the distinction of
having been the starting-point of a new literary and philosophical movement
which has powerfully affected the finest and most cultivated minds among both
Jews and Christians in the Middle Ages. This general progress of the
Muhammedan world has somehow been arrested, but research has shown that what
European scholars knew of Greek philosophy, of mathematics, astronomy, and
like sciences, for several centuries before the Renaissance, was, roughly
speaking, all derived from Latin treatises ultimately based on Arabic
originals; and it was the Koran which, though indirectly, gave the first
impetus to these studies among the Arabs and their allies. Linguistic
investigations, poetry, and other branches of literature, also made their
appearance soon after or simultaneously with the publication of the Koran;
and the literary movement thus initiated has resulted in some of the finest
products of genius and learning.

The style in which the Koran is written requires some special attention in
this introduction. The literary form is for the most part different from
anything else we know. In its finest passages we indeed seem to hear a voice
akin to that of the ancient Hebrew prophets, but there is much in the book
which Europeans usually regard as faulty. The tendency to repetition which is
an inherent characteristic of the Semitic mind appears here in an exaggerated
form, and there is in addition much in the Koran which strikes us as wild and
fantastic. The most unfavourable criticism ever passed on Muhammed's style
has in fact been penned by the prophet's greatest British admirer, Carlyle
himself; and there are probably many now who find themselves in the same
dilemma with that great writer.

The fault appears, however, to lie partly in our difficulty to appreciate the
psychology of the Arab prophet. We must, in order to do him justice, give
full consideration to his temperament and to the condition of things around
him. We are here in touch with an untutored but fervent mind, trying to
realise itself and to assimilate certain great truths which have been
powerfully borne in upon him, in order to impart them in a convincing form to
his fellow-tribesmen. He is surrounded by obstacles of every kind, yet he
manfully struggles on with the message that is within him. Learning he has
none, or next to none. His chief objects of knowledge are floating stories
and traditions largely picked up from hearsay, and his over-wrought mind is
his only teacher. The literary compositions to which he had ever listened
were the half-cultured, yet often wildly powerful rhapsodies of early Arabian
minstrels, akin to Ossian rather than to anything else within our knowledge.
What wonder then that his Koran took a form which to our colder temperaments
sounds strange, unbalanced, and fantastic?

Yet the Moslems themselves consider the book the finest that ever appeared
among men. They find no incongruity in the style. To them the matter is all
true and the manner all perfect. Their eastern temperament responds readily
to the crude, strong, and wild appeal which its cadences make to them, and
the jingling rhyme in which the sentences of a discourse generally end adds
to the charm of the whole. The Koran, even if viewed from the point of view
of style alone, was to them from the first nothing less than a miracle, as
great a miracle as ever was wrought.

But to return to our own view of the case. Our difficulty in appreciating the
style of the Koran even moderately is, of course, increased if, instead of
the original, we have a translation before us. But one is happy to be able to
say that Rodwell's rendering is one of the best that have as yet been
produced. It seems to a great extent to carry with it the atmosphere in which
Muhammed lived, and its sentences are imbued with the flavour of the East.
The quasi-verse form, with its unfettered and irregular rhythmic flow of the
lines, which has in suitable cases been adopted, helps to bring out much of
the wild charm of the Arabic. Not the least among its recommendations is,
perhaps, that it is scholarly without being pedantic that is to say, that it
aims at correctness without sacrificing the right effect of the whole to
over-insistence on small details.

Another important merit of Rodwell's edition is its chronological arrangement
of the Suras or chapters. As he tells us himself in his preface, it is now in
a number of cases impossible to ascertain the exact occasion on which a
discourse, or part of a discourse, was delivered, so that the system could
not be carried through with entire consistency. But the sequence adopted is
in the main based on the best available historical and literary evidence; and
in following the order of the chapters as here printed, the reader will be
able to trace the development of the prophet's mind as he gradually advanced
from the early flush of inspiration to the less spiritual and more equivocal
r\oc\le of warrior, politician, and founder of an empire.

G. Margoliouth.


1  Mahommed and the Rise of Islam, in ¬ìHeroes of Nations¬î series.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS.  From the original Arabic by G. Sale, 1734, 1764, 1795,
1801; many later editions, which include a memoir of the translator by R. A.
Davenport, and notes from Savary's version of the Koran; an edition issued by
E. M. Wherry, with additional notes and commentary (Tr\du\ubner's Oriental
Series), 1882, etc.; Sale's translation has also been edited in the Chandos
Classics, and among Lubbock's Hundred Books (No. 22). The Holy Qur\da\an,
translated by Dr. Mohammad Abdul Hakim Khan, with short notes, 1905;
Translation by J. M. Rodwell, with notes and index (the Suras arranged in
chronological order), 1861, 2nd ed., 1876; by E. H. Palmer (Sacred Books of
the East, vols. vi., ix.).

SELECTIONS: Chiefly from Sale's edition, by E. W. Lane, 1843; revised and
enlarged with introduction by S. Lane-Poole. (Tr\du\ubner's Oriental Series),
1879; The Speeches and Table-Talk of the Prophet Mohammad, etc., chosen and
translated, with introduction and notes by S. Lane-Poole, 1882 (Golden
Treasury Series); Selections with introduction and explanatory notes (from
Sale and other writers), by J. Murdock (Sacred Books of the East), 2nd ed.,
1902; The Religion of the Koran, selections with an introduction by A. N.
Wollaston (The Wisdom of the East), 1904.
	See also: Sir W. Muir: The Koran, its Composition and Teaching, 1878;
H. Hirschfeld: New Researches into the Composition and Exegesis of the Qoran,
1902; W. St C. Tisdale: Sources of the Qur¬í√¢n, 1905; H. U. W. Stanton: The
Teaching of the Qur¬í√°n, 1919; A. Mingana: Syriac Influence on the Style of
the Kur¬í√¢n, 1927.



TO

SIR WILLIAM MARTIN, K.T., D.C.L.
LATE CHIEF JUSTICE OF NEW ZEALAND,

THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED,

WITH SINCERE FEELINGS OF ESTEEM FOR HIS PRIVATE WORTH,

PUBLIC SERVICES,

AND EMINENT LITERARY ATTAINMENTS,

BY

				THE TRANSLATOR.



PREFACE

It is necessary that some brief explanation should be given with reference to
the arrangement of the Suras, or chapters, adopted in this translation of the
Koran. It should be premised that their order as it stands in all Arabic
manuscripts, and in all hitherto printed editions, whether Arabic or
European, is not chronological, neither is there any authentic tradition to
shew that it rests upon the authority of Muhammad himself. The scattered
fragments of the Koran were in the first instance collected by his immediate
successor Abu Bekr, about a year after the Prophet's death, at the suggestion
of Omar, who foresaw that, as the Muslim warriors, whose memories were the
sole depositaries of large portions of the revelations, died off or were
slain, as had been the case with many in the battle of Yem√¢ma, A.H. 12, the
loss of the greater part, or even of the whole, was imminent. Zaid Ibn
Th√¢bit, a native of Medina, and one of the Ansars, or helpers, who had been
Muhammad's amanuensis, was the person fixed upon to carry out the task, and
we are told that he "gathered together" the fragments of the Koran from every
quarter, "from date leaves and tablets of white stone, and from the breasts
of men."1 The copy thus formed by Zaid probably remained in the possession of
Abu Bekr during the remainder of his brief caliphate, who committed it to the
custody of Haphsa, one of Muhammad's widows, and this text continued during
the ten years of Omar's caliphate to be the standard. In the copies made from
it, various readings naturally and necessarily sprung up; and these, under
the caliphate of Othman, led to such serious disputes between the faithful,
that it became necessary to interpose, and in accordance with the warning of
Hodzeifa, "to stop the people, before they should differ regarding their
scriptures, as did the Jews and Christians."2 In accordance with this advice,
Othman determined to establish a text which should be the sole standard, and
entrusted the redaction to the Zaid already mentioned, with whom he
associated as colleagues, three, according to others, twelve3 of the
Koreisch, in order to secure the purity of that Meccan idiom in which
Muhammad had spoken, should any occasions arise in which the collators might
have to decide upon various readings. Copies of the text formed were thus
forwarded to several of the chief military stations in the new empire, and
all previously existing copies were committed to the flames.

Zaid and his coadjutors, however, do not appear to have arranged the
materials which came into their hands upon any system more definite than that
of placing the longest and best known Suras first, immediately after the
Fatthah, or opening chapter (the eighth in this edition); although even this
rule, artless and unscientific as it is, has not been adhered to with
strictness. Anything approaching to a chronological arrangement was entirely
lost sight of. Late Medina Suras are often placed before early Meccan Suras;
the short Suras at the end of the Koran are its earliest portions; while, as
will be seen from the notes, verses of Meccan origin are to be found embedded
in Medina Suras, and verses promulged at Medina scattered up and down in the
Meccan Suras. It would seem as if Zaid had to a great extent put his
materials together just as they came to hand, and often with entire disregard
to continuity of subject and uniformity of style. The text, therefore, as
hitherto arranged, necessarily assumes the form of a most unreadable and
incongruous patchwork; "une assemblage," says M. Kasimirski in his Preface,
"informe et incoh√©rent de pr√©ceptes moraux, religieux, civils et politiques,
mƒôl√©s d'exhortations, de promesses, et de menaces"-and conveys no idea
whatever of the development and growth of any plan in the mind of the founder
of Islam, or of the circumstances by which he was surrounded and influenced.
It is true that the manner in which Zaid contented himself with simply
bringing together his materials and transcribing them, without any attempt to
mould them into shape or sequence, and without any effort to supply
connecting links between adjacent verses, to fill up obvious chasms, or to
suppress details of a nature discreditable to the founder of Islam, proves
his scrupulous honesty as a compiler, as well as his reverence for the sacred
text, and to a certain extent guarantees the genuineness and authenticity of
the entire volume. But it is deeply to be regretted that he did not combine
some measure of historical criticism with that simplicity and honesty of
purpose which forbade him, as it certainly did, in any way to tamper with the
sacred text, to suppress contradictory, and exclude or soften down
inaccurate, statements.

The arrangement of the Suras in this translation is based partly upon the
traditions of the Muhammadans themselves, with reference especially to the
ancient chronological list printed by Weil in his Mohammed der Prophet, as
well as upon a careful consideration of the subject matter of each separate
Sura and its probable connection with the sequence of events in the life of
Muhammad. Great attention has been paid to this subject by Dr. Weil in the
work just mentioned; by Mr. Muir in his Life of Mahomet, who also publishes a
chronological list of Suras, 21 however of which he admits have "not yet been
carefully fixed;" and especially by N√∂ldeke, in his Geschichte des Q√¥rans, a
work to which public honours were awarded in 1859 by the Paris Academy of
Inscriptions. From the arrangement of this author I see no reason to depart
in regard to the later Suras. It is based upon a searching criticism and
minute analysis of the component verses of each, and may be safely taken as a
standard, which ought not to be departed from without weighty reasons. I
have, however, placed the earlier and more fragmentary Suras, after the two
first, in an order which has reference rather to their subject matter than to
points of historical allusion, which in these Suras are very few; whilst on
the other hand, they are mainly couched in the language of self-communion, of
aspirations after truth, and of mental struggle, are vivid pictures of Heaven
and Hell, or descriptions of natural objects, and refer also largely to the
opposition met with by Muhammad from his townsmen of Mecca at the outset of
his public career. This remark applies to what N√∂ldeke terms "the Suras of
the First Period."

The contrast between the earlier, middle, and later Suras is very striking
and interesting, and will be at once apparent from the arrangement here
adopted. In the Suras as far as the 54th, p. 76, we cannot but notice the
entire predominance of the poetical element, a deep appreciation (as in Sura
xci. p. 38) of the beauty of natural objects, brief fragmentary and
impassioned utterances, denunciations of woe and punishment, expressed for
the most part in lines of extreme brevity. With a change, however, in the
position of Muhammad when he openly assumes the office of "public warner,"
the Suras begin to assume a more prosaic and didactic tone, though the
poetical ornament of rhyme is preserved throughout. We gradually lose the
Poet in the missionary aiming to convert, the warm asserter of dogmatic
truths; the descriptions of natural objects, of the judgment, of Heaven and
Hell, make way for gradually increasing historical statements, first from
Jewish, and subsequently from Christian histories; while, in the 29 Suras
revealed at Medina, we no longer listen to vague words, often as it would
seem without positive aim, but to the earnest disputant with the enemies of
his faith, the Apostle pleading the cause of what he believes to be the Truth
of God. He who at Mecca is the admonisher and persuader, at Medina is the
legislator and the warrior, who dictates obedience, and uses other weapons
than the pen of the Poet and the Scribe. When business pressed, as at Medina,
Poetry makes way for Prose, and although touches of the Poetical element
occasionally break forth, and he has to defend himself up to a very late
period against the charge of being merely a Poet, yet this is rarely the case
in the Medina Suras; and we are startled by finding obedience to God and the
Apostle, God's gifts and the Apostle's, God's pleasure and the Apostle's,
spoken of in the same breath, and epithets and attributes elsewhere applied
to Allah openly applied to himself as in Sura ix., 118, 129.

The Suras, viewed as a whole, strike me as being the work of one who began
his career as a thoughtful enquirer after truth, and an earnest asserter of
it in such rhetorical and poetical forms as he deemed most likely to win and
attract his countrymen, and who gradually proceeded from the dogmatic teacher
to the politic founder of a system for which laws and regulations had to be
provided as occasions arose. And of all the Suras it must be remarked that
they were intended not for readers but for hearers-that they were all
promulgated by public recital-and that much was left, as the imperfect
sentences shew, to the manner and suggestive action of the reciter. It would
be impossible, and indeed it is unnecessary, to attempt a detailed life of
Muhammad within the narrow limits of a Preface. The main events thereof with
which the Suras of the Koran stand in connection, are-The visions of Gabriel,
seen, or said to have been seen, at the outset of his career in his 40th
year, during one of his seasons of annual monthly retirement, for devotion
and meditation to Mount Hir√¢, near Mecca,-the period of mental depression and
re-assurance previous to the assumption of the office of public teacher-the
Fatrah or pause (see n. p. 20) during which he probably waited for a
repetition of the angelic vision-his labours in comparative privacy for three
years, issuing in about 40 converts, of whom his wife Chadijah was the first,
and Abu Bekr the most important: (for it is to him and to Abu Jahl the Sura
xcii. p. 32, refers)-struggles with Meccan unbelief and idolatry followed by
a period during which probably he had the second vision, Sura liii. p. 69,
and was listened to and respected as a person "possessed" (Sura lxix. 42, p.
60, lii. 29, p. 64)-the first emigration to Abyssinia in A.D. 616, in
consequence of the Meccan persecutions brought on by his now open attacks
upon idolatry (Taghout)-increasing reference to Jewish and Christian
histories, shewing that much time had been devoted to their study the
conversion of Omar in 617-the journey to the Thaquifites at Taief in A.D.
620-the intercourse with pilgrims from Medina, who believed in Islam, and
spread the knowledge thereof in their native town, in the same year-the
vision of the midnight journey to Jerusalem and the Heavens-the meetings by
night at Acaba, a mountain near Mecca, in the 11th year of his mission, and
the pledges of fealty there given to him-the command given to the believers
to emigrate to Yathrib, henceforth Medinat-en-nabi (the city of the Prophet)
or El-Medina (the city), in April of A.D. 622-the escape of Muhammad and Abu
Bekr from Mecca to the cave of Thaur-the FLIGHT to Medina in June 20, A.D.
622-treaties made with Christian tribes-increasing, but still very imperfect
acquaintance with Christian doctrines-the Battle of Bedr in Hej. 2, and of
Ohod-the coalition formed against Muhammad by the Jews and idolatrous
Arabians, issuing in the siege of Medina, Hej. 5 (A.D. 627)-the convention,
with reference to the liberty of making the pilgrimage, of Hudaibiya, Hej. 6-
the embassy to Chosroes King of Persia in the same year, to the Governor of
Egypt and to the King of Abyssinia, desiring them to embrace Islam-the
conquest of several Jewish tribes, the most important of which was that of
Chaibar in Hej. 7, a year marked by the embassy sent to Heraclius, then in
Syria, on his return from the Persian campaign, and by a solemn and peaceful
pilgrimage to Mecca-the triumphant entry into Mecca in Hej. 8 (A.D. 630), and
the demolition of the idols of the Caaba-the submission of the Christians of
Nedjran, of Aila on the Red Sea, and of Taief, etc., in Hej. 9, called "the
year of embassies or deputations," from the numerous deputations which
flocked to Mecca proffering submission-and lastly in Hej. 10, the submission
of Hadramont, Yemen, the greater part of the southern and eastern provinces
of Arabia-and the final solemn pilgrimage to Mecca.

While, however, there is no great difficulty in ascertaining the Suras which
stand in connection with the more salient features of Muhammad's life, it is
a much more arduous, and often impracticable task, to point out the precise
events to which individual verses refer, and out of which they sprung. It is
quite possible that Muhammad himself, in a later period of his career,
designedly mixed up later with earlier revelations in the same Suras not for
the sake of producing that mysterious style which seems so pleasing to the
mind of those who value truth least when it is most clear and obvious but for
the purpose of softening down some of the earlier statements which represent
the last hour and awful judgment as imminent; and thus leading his followers
to continue still in the attitude of expectation, and to see in his later
successes the truth of his earlier predictions. If after-thoughts of this
kind are to be traced, and they will often strike the attentive reader, it
then follows that the perplexed state of the text in individual Suras is to
be considered as due to Muhammad himself, and we are furnished with a series
of constant hints for attaining to chronological accuracy. And it may be
remarked in passing, that a belief that the end of all things was at hand,
may have tended to promote the earlier successes of Islam at Mecca, as it
unquestionably was an argument with the Apostles, to flee from "the wrath to
come." It must be borne in mind that the allusions to contemporary minor
events, and to the local efforts made by the new religion to gain the
ascendant are very few, and often couched in terms so vague and general, that
we are forced to interpret the Koran solely by the Koran itself. And for
this, the frequent repetitions of the same histories and the same sentiments,
afford much facility: and the peculiar manner in which the details of each
history are increased by fresh traits at each recurrence, enables us to trace
their growth in the author's mind, and to ascertain the manner in which a
part of the Koran was composed. The absence of the historical element from
the Koran as regards the details of Muhammad's daily life, may be judged of
by the fact, that only two of his contemporaries are mentioned in the entire
volume, and that Muhammad's name occurs but five times, although he is all
the way through addressed by the Angel Gabriel as the recipient of the divine
revelations, with the word SAY. Perhaps such passages as Sura ii. 15, p. 339,
and v. 246, p. 365, and the constant mention of guidance, direction,
wandering, may have been suggested by reminiscences of his mercantile
journeys in his earlier years.

It may be considered quite certain that it was not customary to reduce to
writing any traditions concerning Muhammad himself for at least the greater
part of a century. They rested entirely on the memory of those who have
handed them down, and must necessarily have been coloured by their prejudices
and convictions, to say nothing of the tendency to the formation of myths and
to actual fabrication, which early shews itself, especially in
interpretations of the Koran, to subserve the purposes of the contending
factions of the Ommeyads and Abb√¢sides. It was under the 5th Caliph, Al-
M√¢m≈±n, that three writers (mentioned below) on whom we mainly depend for all
really reliable information, flourished: and even their writings are
necessarily coloured by the theological tendencies of their master and
patron, who was a decided partizan of the divine right of Ali and of his
descendants. The incidents mentioned in the Koran itself, for the
interpretation of which early tradition is available, are comparatively few,
and there are many passages with which it is totally at variance; as, for
instance, that Muhammad worked miracles, which the Koran expressly disclaims.
Traditions can never be considered as at all reliable, unless they are
traceable to some common origin, have descended to us by independent
witnesses, and correspond with the statements of the Koran itself-always of
course deducting such texts as (which is not unfrequently the case) have
themselves given rise to the tradition. It soon becomes obvious to the reader
of Muslim traditions and commentators that both miracles and historical
events have been invented for the sake of expounding a dark and perplexing
text; and that even the earlier traditions are largely tinged with the
mythical element.

The first biographer of Muhammad of whom we have any information was Zohri,
who died A.H. 124, aged 72; but his works, though abundantly quoted by later
writers, are no longer extant. Much of his information was derived from Orwa,
who died A.H. 94, and was a near relative of Ayesha, the prophet's favourite
wife.

Ibn Ishaq, who died in A.H. 151, and who had been a hearer of Zohri, composed
a Biography of Muhammad for the use of the Caliph Al M√°ns≈±r. On this work,
considerable remains of which have come down to us, Ibn Hisham, who died A.H.
213, based his Life of Muhammad.

Waquidi of Medina, who died A.H. 207, composed a biographical work, which has
reached us in an abbreviated form through his secretary (Katib). It is
composed entirely of traditions.

Tabari, "the Livy of the Arabians" (Gibbon, 51, n. 1), who died at Baghdad
A.H. 310, composed annals of Muhammad's life and of the progress of Islam.

These ancient writers are the principal sources whence anything like
authentic information as to the life of Muhammad has been derived. And it may
be safely concluded that after the diligent investigations carried on by the
professed collectors of traditions in the second century after the Hejira,
that little or nothing remains to be added to our stores of information
relative to the details of Muhammad's life, or to facts which may further
illustrate the text of the Koran. But however this may be, no records which
are posterior in date to these authorities can be considered as at all
deserving of dependance. "To consider," says Dr. Sprenger, "late historians
like Abulfeda as authorities, and to suppose that an account gains in
certainty because it is mentioned by several of them, is highly uncritical."
Life of Mohammad, p. 73.

The sources whence Muhammad derived the materials of his Koran are, over and
above the more poetical parts, which are his own creation, the legends of his
time and country, Jewish traditions based upon the Talmud, or perverted to
suit his own purposes, and the floating Christian traditions of Arabia and of
S. Syria. At a later period of his career no one would venture to doubt the
divine origin of the entire book. But at its commencement the case was
different. The people of Mecca spoke openly and tauntingly of it as the work
of a poet, as a collection of antiquated or fabulous legends, or as palpable
sorcery.4 They accused him of having confederates, and even specified
foreigners who had been his coadjutors. Such were Salman the Persian, to whom
he may have owed the descriptions of Heaven and Hell, which are analogous to
those of the Zendavesta; and the Christian monk Sergius, or as the
Muhammadans term him, Boheira. From the latter, and perhaps from other
Christians, especially slaves naturalised at Mecca, Muhammad obtained access
to the teaching of the Apocryphal Gospels, and to many popular traditions of
which those Gospels are the concrete expression. His wife Chadijah, as well
as her cousin Waraka, a reputed convert to Christianity, and Muhammad's
intimate friend, are said to have been well acquainted with the doctrines and
sacred books both of Jews and Christians. And not only were several Arab
tribes in the neighbourhood of Mecca converts to the Christian faith, but on
two occasions Muhammad had travelled with his uncle, Abu Talib, as far as
Bostra, where he must have had opportunities of learning the general outlines
of Oriental Christian doctrine, and perhaps of witnessing the ceremonial of
their worship. And it appears tolerably certain that previous to and at the
period of his entering into public life, there was a large number of
enquirers at Mecca, who like Zaid, Omayah of Taief, Waraka, etc., were
dissatisfied equally with the religion of their fathers, the Judaism and the
Christianity which they saw around them, and were anxiously enquiring for
some better way. The names and details of the lives of twelve of the
"companions" of Muhammad who lived in Mecca, Medina, and Taief, are recorded,
who previous to his assumption of the Prophetic office, called themselves
Hanyfs, i.e., converts, puritans, and were believers in one God, and regarded
Abraham as the founder of their religion. Muhammad publicly acknowledged that
he was a Hanyf-and this sect of the Hanyfites (who are in no way to be
confounded with the later sect of the same name) were among his Meccan
precursors. See n. pp. 209, 387. Their history is to be found in the Fihrist-
MS. Paris, anc. fonds, nr. 874 (and in other treatises)-which Dr. Sprenger
believes to have been in the library of the Caliph El-M√¢m≈±n. In this
treatise, the Hanyfs are termed Sabeites, and said to have received the
Volumes (Sohof) or Books of Abraham, mentioned in Sura lxxxvii. 19, p. 40,
41, which most commentators affirm to have been borrowed from them, as is
also the case with the latter part of Sura liii. 37, ad f. p. 71; so that
from these "Books" Muhammad derived the legends of Ad and Themoud, whose
downfall, recent as it was (see note p. 300), he throws back to a period
previous to that of Moses, who is made to ask (Sura xiv. 9, p. 226) "whether
their history had reached his hearers." Muhammad is said to have discovered
these "Books" to be a recent forgery, and that this is the reason why no
mention of them occurs after the fourth year of his Prophetic function, A.D.
616. Hence too, possibly, the title Hanyf was so soon dropped and exchanged
for that of Muslim, one who surrenders or resigns himself to God. The Waraka
above mentioned, and cousin of Chadijah, is said to have believed on Muhammad
as long as he continued true to the principles of the Hanyfs, but to have
quitted him in disgust at his subsequent proceedings, and to have died an
orthodox Christian.

It has been supposed that Muhammad derived many of his notions concerning
Christianity from Gnosticism, and that it is to the numerous gnostic sects
the Koran alludes when it reproaches the Christians with having "split up
their religion into parties." But for Muhammad thus to have confounded
Gnosticism with Christianity itself, its prevalence in Arabia must have been
far more universal than we have any reason to believe it really was. In fact,
we have no historical authority for supposing that the doctrines of these
heretics were taught or professed in Arabia at all. It is certain, on the
other hand, that the Basilidans, Valentinians, and other gnostic sects had
either died out, or been reabsorbed into the orthodox Church, towards the
middle of the fifth century, and had disappeared from Egypt before the sixth.
It is nevertheless possible that the gnostic doctrine concerning the
Crucifixion was adopted by Muhammad as likely to reconcile the Jews to Islam,
as a religion embracing both Judaism and Christianity, if they might believe
that Jesus had not been put to death, and thus find the stumbling-block of
the atonement removed out of their path. The Jews would in this case have
simply been called upon to believe in Jesus as being what the Koran
represents him, a holy teacher, who, like the patriarch Enoch or the prophet
Elijah, had been miraculously taken from the earth. But, in all other
respects, the sober and matter-of-fact statements of the Koran relative to
the family and history of Jesus, are altogether opposed to the wild and
fantastic doctrines of Gnostic emanations, and especially to the manner in
which they supposed Jesus, at his Baptism, to have been brought into union
with a higher nature. It is quite clear that Muhammad borrowed in several
points from the doctrines of the Ebionites, Essenes, and Sabeites. Epiphanius
(H¬ër. x.) describes the notions of the Ebionites of Nabath¬ëa, Moabitis, and
Basanitis with regard to Adam and Jesus, almost in the very words of Sura
iii. 52. He tells us that they observed circumcision, were opposed to
celibacy, forbad turning to the sunrise, but enjoined Jerusalem as their
Kebla (as did Muhammad during twelve years), that they prescribed (as did the
Sabeites), washings, very similar to those enjoined in the Koran, and allowed
oaths (by certain natural objects, as clouds, signs of the Zodiac, oil, the
winds, etc.), which we find adopted in the Koran. These points of contact
with Islam, knowing as we do Muhammad's eclecticism, can hardly be
accidental.

We have no evidence that Muhammad had access to the Christian Scriptures,
though it is just possible that fragments of the Old or New Testament may
have reached him through Chadijah or Waraka, or other Meccan Christians,
possessing MSS. of the sacred volume. There is but one direct quotation (Sura
xxi. 105) in the whole Koran from the Scriptures; and though there are a few
passages, as where alms are said to be given to be seen of men, and as, none
forgiveth sins but God only, which might seem to be identical with texts of
the New Testament, yet this similarity is probably merely accidental. It is,
however, curious to compare such passages as Deut. xxvi. 14, 17; 1 Peter v.
2, with Sura xxiv. 50, p. 448, and x. 73, p. 281 John vii. 15, with the
"illiterate" Prophet-Matt. xxiv. 36, and John xii. 27, with the use of the
word hour as meaning any judgment or crisis, and The last judgment-the voice
of the Son of God which the dead are to hear, with the exterminating or
awakening cry of Gabriel, etc. The passages of this kind, with which the
Koran abounds, result from Muhammad's general acquaintance with Scriptural
phraseology, partly through the popular legends, partly from personal
intercourse with Jews and Christians. And we may be quite certain that
whatever materials Muhammad may have derived from our Scriptures, directly or
indirectly, were carefully recast. He did not even use its words without due
consideration. For instance, except in the phrase "the Lord of the worlds,"
he seems carefully to have avoided the expression the Lord, probably because
it was applied by the Christians to Christ, or to God the Father.

It should also be borne in mind that we have no traces of the existence of
Arabic versions of the Old or New Testament previous to the time of Muhammad.
The passage of St. Jerome-"Hƒác autem translatio nullum de veteribus sequitur
interpretem; sed ex ipso Hebraico, Arabicoque sermone, et interdum Syro, nunc
verba, nunc sensum, nunc simul utrumque resonabit," (Prol. Gal.) obviously
does not refer to versions, but to idiom. The earliest Ar. version of the Old
Testament, of which we have any knowledge, is that of R. Saadias Gaon, A.D.
900; and the oldest Ar. version of the New Testament, is that published by
Erpenius in 1616, and transcribed in the Thebais, in the year 1171, by a
Coptic Bishop, from a copy made by a person whose name is known, but whose
date is uncertain. Michaelis thinks that the Arabic versions of the New
Testament were made between the Saracen conquests in the seventh century, and
the Crusades in the eleventh century-an opinion in which he follows, or
coincides with, Walton (Prol. in Polygl. ¬ß xiv.) who remarks-"Plane constat
versionem Arabicam apud eas (ecclesias orientales) factam esse postquam
lingua Arabica per victorias et religionem Muhammedanicam per Orientem
propagata fuerat, et in multis locis facta esset vernacula." If, indeed, in
these comparatively late versions, the general phraseology, especially in the
histories common to the Scriptures and to the Koran, bore any similarity to
each other, and if the orthography of the proper names had been the same in
each, it might have been fair to suppose that such versions had been made,
more or less, upon the basis of others, which, though now lost, existed in
the ages prior to Muhammad, and influenced, if they did not directly form,
his sources of information. But5 this does not appear to be the case. The
phraseology of our existing versions is not that of the Koran-and these
versions appear to have been made from the Septuagint, the Vulgate, Syriac,
Coptic, and Greek; the four Gospels, says Tischendorf6 originem mixtam habere
videntur.

From the Arab Jews, Muhammad would be enabled to derive an abundant, though
most distorted, knowledge of the Scripture histories. The secrecy in which he
received his instructions from them, and from his Christian informants,
enabled him boldly to declare to the ignorant pagan Meccans that God had
revealed those Biblical histories to him. But there can be no doubt, from the
constant identity between the Talmudic perversions of Scripture histories and
Rabbinic moral precepts, that the Rabbins of the Hejaz communicated their
legends to Muhammad. And it should be remembered that the Talmud was
completed a century previous to the era of Muhammad,7 and cannot fail to have
extensively influenced the religious creed of all the Jews of the Arabian
peninsula. In one passage,8 Muhammad speaks of an individual Jew-perhaps some
one of note among his professed followers, as a witness to his mission; and
there can be no doubt that his relations with the Jews were, at one time,
those of friendship and intimacy, when we find him speak of their recognising
him as they do their own children, and hear him blaming their most colloquial
expressions.9 It is impossible, however, for us at this distance of time to
penetrate the mystery in which this subject is involved. Yet certain it is,
that, although their testimony against Muhammad was speedily silenced, the
Koreisch knew enough of his private history to disbelieve and to disprove his
pretensions of being the recipient of a divine revelation, and that they
accused him of writing from the dictation of teachers morning and evening.10
And it is equally certain, that all the information received by Muhammad was
embellished and recast in his own mind and with his own words. There is a
unity of thought, a directness and simplicity of purpose, a peculiar and
laboured style, a uniformity of diction, coupled with a certain deficiency of
imaginative power, which proves the ayats (signs or verses) of the Koran at
least to be the product of a single pen. The longer narratives were,
probably, elaborated in his leisure hours, while the shorter verses, each
claiming to be a sign or miracle, were promulgated as occasion required them.
And, whatever Muhammad may himself profess in the Koran11 as to his
ignorance, even of reading and writing, and however strongly modern
Muhammadans may insist upon the same point an assertion by the way
contradicted by many good authors12-there can be no doubt that to assimilate
and work up his materials, to fashion them into elaborate Suras, to fit them
for public recital, must have been a work requiring much time, study, and
meditation, and presumes a far greater degree of general culture than any
orthodox Muslim will be disposed to admit.

In close connection with the above remarks, stands the question of Muhammad's
sincerity and honesty of purpose in coming forward as a messenger from God.
For if he was indeed the illiterate person the Muslims represent him to have
been, then it will be hard to escape their inference that the Koran is, as
they assert it to be, a standing miracle. But if, on the other hand, it was a
Book carefully concocted from various sources, and with much extraneous aid,
and published as a divine oracle, then it would seem that the author is at
once open to the charge of the grossest imposture, and even of impious
blasphemy. The evidence rather shews, that in all he did and wrote, Muhammad
was actuated by a sincere desire to deliver his countrymen from the grossness
of its debasing idolatries-that he was urged on by an intense desire to
proclaim that great truth of the Unity of the Godhead which had taken full
possession of his own soul-that the end to be attained justified to his mind
the means he adopted in the production of his Suras-that he worked himself up
into a belief that he had received a divine call-and that he was carried on
by the force of circumstances, and by gradually increasing successes, to
believe himself the accredited messenger of Heaven. The earnestness of those
convictions which at Mecca sustained him under persecution, and which perhaps
led him, at any price as it were, and by any means, not even excluding deceit
and falsehood, to endeavour to rescue his countrymen from idolatry,-naturally
stiffened at Medina into tyranny and unscrupulous violence. At the same time,
he was probably, more or less, throughout his whole career, the victim of a
certain amount of self-deception. A cataleptic13 subject from his early
youth, born-according to the traditions-of a highly nervous and excitable
mother, he would be peculiarly liable to morbid and fantastic hallucinations,
and alternations of excitement and depression, which would win for him, in
the eyes of his ignorant countrymen, the credit of being inspired. It would
be easy for him to persuade himself that he was "the seal of the Prophets,"
the proclaimer of a doctrine of the Divine Unity, held and taught by the
Patriarchs, especially by Abraham-a doctrine that should present to mankind
Judaism divested of its Mosaic ceremonial, and Christianity divested of the
Atonement and the Trinity14-doctrine, as he might have believed, fitted and
destined to absorb Judaism, Christianity, and Idolatry; and this persuasion,
once admitted into his mind as a conviction, retained possession of it, and
carried him on, though often in the use of means, towards the end of his
career, far different from those with which he commenced it, to a victorious
consummation. It is true that the state of Arabia previous to the time of
Muhammad was one of preparedness for a new religion that the scattered
elements were there, and wanted only the mind of a master to harmonise and
enforce them and that Islam was, so to speak, a necessity of the time.15
Still Muhammad's career is a wonderful instance of the force and life that
resides in him who possesses an intense Faith in God and in the unseen world;
and whatever deductions may be made-and they are many and serious-from the
noble and truthful in his character, he will always be regarded as one of
those who have had that influence over the faith, morals, and whole earthly
life of their fellow-men, which none but a really great man ever did, or can,
exercise; and as one of those, whose efforts to propagate some great verity
will prosper, in spite of manifold personal errors and defects, both of
principle and character.

The more insight we obtain, from undoubted historical sources, into the
actual character of Muhammad, the less reason do we find to justify the
strong vituperative language poured out upon his head by Maracci, Prideaux,
and others, in recent days, one of whom has found, in the Byzantine
"Maometis," the number of the Beast (Rev. xii)! It is nearer to the truth to
say that he was a great though imperfect character, an earnest though
mistaken teacher, and that many of his mistakes and imperfections were the
result of circumstances, of temperament, and constitution; and that there
must be elements both of truth and goodness in the system of which he was the
main author, to account for the world-wide phenomenon, that whatever may be
the intellectual inferiority (if such is, indeed, the fact) of the Muslim
races, the influence of his teaching, aided, it is true, by the vast impulse
given to it by the victorious arms of his followers, has now lasted for
nearly thirteen centuries, and embraces more than one hundred millions of our
race-more than one-tenth part of the inhabitants of the globe.

It must be acknowledged, too, that the Koran deserves the highest praise for
its conceptions of the Divine nature, in reference to the attributes of
Power, Knowledge, and universal Providence and Unity-that its belief and
trust in the One God of Heaven and Earth is deep and fervent-and that, though
it contains fantastic visions and legends, teaches a childish ceremonial, and
justifies bloodshedding, persecution, slavery, and polygamy, yet that at the
same time it embodies much of a noble and deep moral earnestness, and
sententious oracular wisdom, and has proved that there are elements in it on
which mighty nations, and conquering though not, perhaps, durable-empires can
be built up. It is due to the Koran, that the occupants in the sixth century
of an arid peninsula, whose poverty was only equalled by their ignorance,
become not only the fervent and sincere votaries of a new creed, but, like
Amru and many more, its warlike propagators. Impelled possibly by drought and
famine, actuated partly by desire of conquest, partly by religious
convictions, they had conquered Persia in the seventh century, the northern
coasts of Africa, and a large portion of Spain in the eighth, the Punjaub and
nearly the whole of India in the ninth. The simple shepherds and wandering
Bedouins of Arabia, are transformed, as if by a magician's wand, into the
founders of empires, the builders of cities, the collectors of more libraries
than they at first destroyed, while cities like Fost√¢t, Baghdad, Cordova, and
Delhi, attest the power at which Christian Europe trembled. And thus, while
the Koran, which underlays this vast energy and contains the principles which
are its springs of action, reflects to a great extent the mixed character of
its author, its merits as a code of laws, and as a system of religious
teaching, must always be estimated by the changes which it introduced into
the customs and beliefs of those who willingly or by compulsion embraced it.
In the suppression of their idolatries, in the substitution of the worship of
Allah for that of the powers of nature and genii with Him, in the abolition
of child murder, in the extinction of manifold superstitious usages, in the
reduction of the number of wives to a fixed standard, it was to the Arabians
an unquestionable blessing, and an accession, though not in the Christian
sense a Revelation, of Truth; and while every Christian must deplore the
overthrow of so many flourishing Eastern churches by the arms of the
victorious Muslims, it must not be forgotten that Europe, in the middle ages,
owed much of her knowledge of dialectic philosophy, of medicine, and
architecture, to Arabian writers, and that Muslims formed the connecting link
between the West and the East for the importation of numerous articles of
luxury and use. That an immense mass of fable and silly legend has been built
up upon the basis of the Koran is beyond a doubt, but for this Muhammad is
not answerable, any more than he is for the wild and bloodthirsty excesses of
his followers in after ages. I agree with Sale in thinking that, "how
criminal soever Muhammad may have been in imposing a false religion on
mankind, the praises due to his real virtues ought not to be denied him"
(Preface), and venture to think that no one can rise from the perusal of his
Koran without argeeing with that motto from St. Augustin, which Sale has
prefixed to his title page, "Nulla falsa doctrina est, quƒá non aliquid veri
permisceat." Qu¬ëst. Evang. ii. 40.

The Arabic text from which this translation has been made is that of Fluegel.
Leips. 1841. The translations of Sale, Ullmann, Wahl, Hammer von Purgstall in
the Fundgruben des Orients, and M. Kasimirski, have been collated throughout;
and above all, the great work of Father Maracci, to whose accuracy and
research search Sale's work mainly owes its merits. Sale has, however,
followed Maracci too closely, especially by introducing his paraphrastic
comments into the body of the text, as well as by his constant use of
Latinised instead of Saxon words. But to Sale's "Preliminary Discourse" the
reader is referred, as to a storehouse of valuable information; as well as to
the works of Geiger, Gerock, and Freytag, and to the lives of Muhammad by Dr.
Weil, Mr. Muir, and that of Dr. Sprenger now issuing from the press, in
German. The more brief and poetical verses of the earlier Suras are
translated with a freedom from which I have altogether abstained in the
historical and prosaic portions; but I have endeavoured nowhere to use a
greater amount of paraphrase than is necessary to convey the sense of the
original. "Vel verbum e verbo," says S. Jerome (Prƒáf. in Jobum) of versions,
"vel sensum e sensu, vel ex utroque commixtum, et medie temperatum genus
translationis." The proper names are usually given as in our Scriptures: the
English reader would not easily recognise Noah as N≈±h, Lot as L≈±t, Moses as
Musa, Abraham as Ibrahym, Pharaoh as Firaun, Aaron as Harun, Jesus as Isa,
John as Yahia, etc.; and it has been thought best to give different
renderings of the same constantly recurring words and phrases, in order more
fully to convey their meaning. For instance, the Arabic words which mean
Companions of the fire, are also rendered inmates of, etc., given up to,
etc.; the People of the Book, i.e. Jews, Christians and Sabeites, is
sometimes retained, sometimes paraphrased. This remark applies to such words
as tanzyl, lit. downsending or Revelation; zikr, the remembrance or constant
repetition or mention of God's name as an act of devotion; saha, the Hour of
present or final judgment; and various epithets of Allah.

I have nowhere attempted to represent the rhymes of the original. The
"Proben" of H. v. Purgstall, in the Fundgruben des Orients, excellent as they
are in many respects, shew that this can only be done with a sacrifice of
literal translation. I subjoin as a specimen Lieut. Burton's version of the
Fatthah, or opening chapter of previous editions. See Sura [viii.] p. 28.

	1  In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate!
	2  Praise be to Allah, who the three worlds made.
	3  The Merciful, the Compassionate,
	4  The King of the day of Fate.
	5  Thee alone do we worship, and of thee alone do we ask aid.
	6  Guide us to the path that is straight-
	7  	The path of those to whom thy love is great,
		Not those on whom is hate,
		Nor they that deviate.		Amen.

"I have endeavoured," he adds, "in this translation to imitate the imperfect
rhyme of the original Arabic. Such an attempt, however, is full of
difficulties. The Arabic is a language in which, like Italian, it is almost
impossible not to rhyme." Pilgr. ii. 78.


1  Mishc√¢t, vol. i. p. 524.  E. Trans. B. viii. 3, 3.

2  Mishc√¢t, as above.  Muir, i. p. xiii.  Freyt. Einl., p. 384.  Memoires de
l¬íAcad. T. 50, p. 426.  N√∂ld. p. 205.

3  Kit√¢b al Waquidi, p. 278

4  See Suras xxxvi. xxv. xvii.

5  See Walton¬ís Prol. ad Polygl. Lond. ¬ß xiv. 2.

6  Prol. in N.T. p. lxxviii.

7  The date of the Bab. Gemara is A.D. 530; of the Jerusalem Gamara, A.D.
430; of the Mischina A.D. 220; See Gfr√∂rer¬ís Jahrhundert des Heils, pp. 11-
44.

8  Sura xlvi. 10, p. 314.

9  Sura vi. 20, p. 318.  Sura ii. 13 (p. 339), verse 98, etc.

10  Sura xxv. 5, 6, p. 159.

11  Sura. vii. 156, p. 307; xxix. 47, p. 265.

12  See Dr. Sprenger¬ís ¬ìLife,¬î p. 101.

13  Or, epileptic.

14  A line of argument to be adopted by a Christian missionary in dealing
with a Muhammadan should be, not to attack Islam as a mass of error, but to
shew that it contains fragments of disjointed truth-that it is based upon
Christianity and Judaism partially understood-especially upon the latter,
without any appreciation of its typical character pointing to Christianity as
a final dispensation.

15  Muhammad can scarcely have failed to observe the opportunity offered for
the growth of a new power, by the ruinous strifes of the Persians and Greeks.
Abulfeda (Life of Muhammad, p. 76) expressly says that he had promised his
followers the spoils o Chosroes and Cƒásar.


SURA1 XCVI.-THICK BLOOD, OR CLOTS OF BLOOD [I.]

MECCA.-19 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful2

RECITE3 thou, in the name of thy Lord who created;-

Created man from CLOTS OF BLOOD:-

Recite thou! For thy Lord is the most Beneficent,

Who hath taught the use of the pen;-

Hath taught Man that which he knoweth not.

Nay, verily,4 Man is insolent,

Because he seeth himself possessed of riches.

Verily, to thy Lord is the return of all.

What thinkest thou of him that holdeth back

A servant5 of God when he prayeth?

What thinkest thou?6 Hath he followed the true Guidance, or enjoined Piety?

What thinkest thou? Hath he treated the truth as a lie and turned his back?

What! doth he not know how that God seeth?

Nay, verily, if he desist not, We shall seize him by the forelock,

The lying sinful forelock!

Then let him summon his associates;7

We too will summon the guards of Hell:

Nay! obey him not; but adore, and draw nigh to God.8


_______________________

1 The word Sura occurs nine times in the Koran, viz. Sur. ix. 65, 87, 125,
128; xxiv. 1; xlvii. 22 (twice); ii. 21; x. 39; but it is not easy to
determine whether it means a whole chapter, or part only of a chapter, or is
used in the sense of "revelation." See Weil's Mohammed der Prophet, pp. 361-
363. It is understood by the Muhammadan commentators to have a primary
reference to the succession of subjects or parts, like the rows of bricks in
a wall. The titles of the Suras are generally taken from some word occurring
in each, which is printed in large type throughout, where practicable.

2 This formula-Bismillahi 'rrahmani 'rrahim-is of Jewish origin. It was in
the first instance taught to the Koreisch by Omayah of Taief, the poet, who
was a contemporary with, but somewhat older than, Muhammad; and who, during
his mercantile journeys into Arabia Petr¬ëa and Syria, had made himself
acquainted with the sacred books and doctrines of Jews and Christians. (Kitab
al-Agh√¢ni, 16. Delhi.) Muhammad adopted and constantly used it, and it is
prefixed to each Sura except the ninth. The former of the two epithets
implies that the mercy of God is exercised as occasions arise, towards all
his creatures; the latter that the quality of mercy is inherent in God and
permanent, so that there is only a shade of difference between the two words.
Maracci well renders, In Nomine Dei Miseratoris, Misericordis. The rendering
I have adopted is that of Mr. Lane in his extracts from the Koran. See also
Freytag's Lex. ii. p. 133. Perhaps, In the name of Allah, the God of Mercy,
the Merciful, would more fully express the original Arabic. The first five
verses of this Sura are, in the opinion of nearly all commentators, ancient
and modern, the earliest revelations made to Muhammad, in the 40th year of
his life, and the starting point of El-Islam. (See the authorities quoted in
detail in N√∂ldeke's Geschichte des Qor√¢ns, p. 62, n.)

3 The usual rendering is read. But the word qaraa, which is the root of the
word Koran, analogous to the Rabbinic mikra, rather means to address, recite;
and with regard to its etymology and use in the kindred dialects to call, cry
aloud, proclaim. Compare Isai. lviii. 1; 1 Kings xviii. 37; and Gesen.
Thesaur. on the Hebrew root. I understand this passage to mean, "Preach to
thy fellow men what thou believest to be true of thy Lord who has created man
from the meanest materials, and can in like manner prosper the truth which
thou proclaimest. He has taught man the art of writing (recently introduced
at Mecca) and in this thou wilt find a powerful help for propagating the
knowledge of the divine Unity." The speaker in this, as in all the Suras, is
Gabriel, of whom Muhammad had, as he believed, a vision on the mountain Hir√¢,
near Mecca. See note 1 on the next page. The details of the vision are quite
unhistorical.

4 This, and the following verses, may have been added at a later period,
though previous to the Flight, and with special reference, if we are to
believe the commentators Beidhawi, etc., to the opposition which Muhammad
experienced at the hands of his opponent, Abu Jahl, who had threatened to set
his foot on the Prophet's neck when prostrate in prayer. But the whole
passage admits of application to mankind in general.

5 That is Muhammad. N√∂ldeke, however, proposes to render "a slave." And it is
certain that the doctrines of Islam were in the first instance embraced by
slaves, many of whom had been carried away from Christian homes, or born of
Christian parents at Mecca. "Men of this description," says Dr. Sprenger
(Life of Mohammad. Allahabad. p. 159), "no doubt prepared the way for the
Islam by inculcating purer notions respecting God upon their masters and
their brethren. These men saw in Mohammad their liberator; and being
superstitious enough to consider his fits as the consequence of an
inspiration, they were among the first who acknowledged him as a prophet.
Many of them suffered torture for their faith in him, and two of them died as
martyrs. The excitement among the slaves when Mohammad first assumed his
office was so great, that Abd Allah bin Jod'an, who had one hundred of these
sufferers, found it necessary to remove them from Makkah, lest they should
all turn converts." See Sura xvi. 105, 111; ii. 220.

6 Lit. hast thou seen if he be upon the guidance.

7 The principal men of the Koreisch who adhered to Abu Jahl.

8 During a period variously estimated from six months to three years from the
revelation of this Sura, or of its earliest verses, the prophetic inspiration
and the revelation of fresh Suras is said to have been suspended. This
interval is called the Fatrah or intermission; and the Meccan Suras delivered
at its close show that at or during this period Muhammad had gained an
increasing and more intimate acquaintance with the Jewish and Christian
Scriptures. "The accounts, however," says Mr. Muir (vol. ii. 86) "are
throughout confused, if not contradictory; and we can only gather with
certainty that there was a time during which his mind hung in suspense, and
doubted the divine mission." The idea of any supernatural influence is of
course to be entirely excluded; although there is no doubt that Muhammad
himself had a full belief in the personality and influence of Satans and
Djinn. Profound meditation, the struggles of an earnest mind anxious to
attain to truth, the morbid excitability of an epileptic subject, visions
seen in epileptic swoons, disgust at Meccan idolatry, and a desire to teach
his countrymen the divine Unity will sufficiently account for the period of
indecision termed the Fatrah, and for the determination which led Muhammad,
in all sincerity, but still self-deceived, to take upon himself the office
and work of a Messenger from God. We may perhaps infer from such passages as
Sura ii. 123, what had ever been the leading idea in Muhammad's mind.


SURA LXXIV.-THE ENWRAPPED1 [II.]

MECCA.-55 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O THOU, ENWRAPPED in thy mantle!

Arise and warn!

Thy Lord-magnify Him!

Thy raiment-purify it!

The abomination-flee it!

And bestow not favours that thou mayest receive again with increase;

And for thy Lord wait thou patiently.

For when there shall be a trump on the trumpet,2

That shall be a distressful day,

A day, to the Infidels, devoid of ease.

Leave me alone to deal with him3 whom I have created,

And on whom I have bestowed vast riches,

And sons dwelling before him,

And for whom I have smoothed all things smoothly down;-

Yet desireth he that I should add more!

But no!  because to our signs he is a foe

I will lay grievous woes upon him.

For he plotted and he planned!

May he be cursed!  How he planned!

Again, may he be cursed!  How he planned!

Then looked he around him,

Then frowned and scowled,

Then turned his back and swelled with disdain,

And said, ¬ìThis is merely magic that will be wrought;

It is merely the word of a mortal.¬î

We will surely cast him into Hell-fire.

And who shall teach thee what Hell-fire is?

It leaveth nought, it spareth nought,

Blackening the skin.

Over it are nineteen angels.

None but angels have we made guardians of the fire:4 nor have we made this to
be their number but to perplex the unbelievers, and that they who possess the
Scriptures may be certain of the truth of the Koran, and that they who
believe may increase their faith;

And that they to whom the Scriptures have been given, and the believers, may
not doubt;

And that the infirm of heart and the unbelievers may say, What meaneth God by
this parable?

Thus God misleadeth whom He will, and whom He will doth He guide aright: and
none knoweth the armies of thy Lord but Himself: and this is no other than a
warning to mankind.

Nay, by the Moon!

By the Night when it retreateth!

By the Morn when it brighteneth!

Hell is one of the most grievous woes,

Fraught with warning to man,

To him among you who desireth to press forward, or to remain behind.5

For its own works lieth every soul in pledge.  But they of God¬ís right hand

In their gardens shall ask of the wicked;-

¬ìWhat hath cast you into Hell-fire?¬î6

They will say, ¬ìWe were not of those who prayed,

And we were not of those who fed the poor,

And we plunged into vain disputes with vain disputers,

And we rejected as a lie, the day of reckoning,

Till the certainty7 came upon us¬î-

And intercession of the interceders shall not avail them.

Then what hath come to them that they turn aside from the Warning

As if they were affrighted asses fleeing from a lion?

And every one of them would fain have open pages given to him out of Heaven.

It shall not be.  They fear not the life to come.

It shall not be.  For this Koran is warning enough.  And whoso will, it
warneth him.

But not unless God please, shall they be warned.  Meet is He to be feared.
Meet is forgiveness in Him.


_______________________

1 This Sura is placed by Muir in the ¬ìsecond stage¬î of Meccan Suras, and
twenty-first in chronological order, in the third or fourth year of the
Prophet¬ís career.  According, however, to the chronological list of Suras
given by Weil (Leben M. p. 364) from ancient tradition, as well as from the
consentient voice of tradionists and commentaries (v. N√∂ld. Geschichte, p.
69; Sprenger¬ís Life of Mohammad, p. 111) it was the next revealed after the
Fatrah, and the designation to the prophetic office.  The main features of
the tradition are, that Muhammad while wandering about in the hills near
Mecca, distracted by doubts and by anxiety after truth, had a vision of the
Angel Gabriel seated on a throne between heaven and earth, that he ran to his
wife, Chadijah, in the greatest alarm, and desired her, perhaps from
superstitious motives (and believing that if covered with clothes he should
be shielded from the glances of evil spirits-comp. Stanley on I Cor. xi. 10),
to envelope him in his mantle; that then Gabriel came down and addressed him
as in v. I.  This vision, like that which preceded Sura xcvi., may actually
have occurred during the hallucinations of one of the epileptic fits from
which Muhammad from early youth appears to have suffered.  Hence Muhammad in
Sura lxxxi. appeals to it as a matter of fact, and such he doubtless believe
it to be.  It may here be observed, that however absurd the Muslim traditions
may be in many of their details, it will generally be found that where there
is an ancient and tolerably universal consent, there will be found at the
bottom a residuum of fact and historical truth.  At the same time there can
be no doubt but that the details of the traditions are too commonly founded
upon the attempt to explain or to throw light upon a dark passage of the
Koran, and are pure inventions of a later age.

2 The Arabic words are not those used in later Suras to express the same
idea.

3  Said to be Walid b. Mogheira, a person of note among the unbelieving
Meccans.  This portion of the Sura seems to be of a different date from the
first seven verses, though very ancient, and the change of subject is similar
to that at v. 9 of the previous Sura.

4 This and the three following verses wear the appearance of having been
inserted at a later period to meet objections respecting the number of the
angels who guard hell, raised by the Jews; perhaps at Medina, as the four
classes of persons specified are those whom Muhammad had to deal with in that
city, viz., the Jews, Believers, the Hypocrites, or undecided, and Idolaters.
These are constantly mentioned together in the Medina Suras.

5 That is, who believe, and do not believe.

6 As the word sakar disturbs the rhyme, it may have been inserted by a
mistake of the copyist for the usual word, which suits it.

7 That is, death.  Beidh.  Comp. Sura xv. 99.


SURA LXXIII. THE ENFOLDED1 [III.]

MECCA. 20 Verses.

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O THOU ENFOLDED in thy mantle,

Stand up all night, except a small portion of it, for prayer:

Half; or curtail the half a little,-

Or add to it: And with measured tone intone the Koran,2

For we shall devolve on thee weighty words.

Verily, at the oncoming of night are devout impressions strongest, and words
are most collected;3

But in the day time thou hast continual employ-

And commemorate the name of thy Lord, and devote thyself to Him with entire
devotion.

Lord of the East and of the West! No God is there but He! Take Him for thy
protector,

And endure what they say with patience, and depart from them with a decorous
departure.

And let Me alone with the gainsayers, rich in the pleasures of this life; and
bear thou with them yet a little while:

For with Us are strong fetters, and a flaming fire,

And food that choketh, and a sore torment.

The day cometh when the earth and the mountains shall be shaken; and the
mountains shall become a loose sand heap.

Verily, we have sent you an Apostle to witness against you, even as we sent
an Apostle to Pharaoh:

But Pharaoh rebelled against the Apostle, and we therefore laid hold on him
with a severe chastisement.

And how, if ye believe not, will you screen yourselves from the day that
shall turn children greyheaded?

The very heaven shall be reft asunder by it: this threat shall be carried
into effect.

Lo! this is a warning. Let him then who will, take the way to his Lord.

Of a truth,4 thy Lord knoweth that thou prayest almost two-thirds, or half,
or a third of the night, as do a part of thy followers. But God measureth the
night and the day:  He knoweth that ye cannot count its hours aright, and
therefore, turneth to you mercifully. Recite then so much of the Koran as may
be easy to you. He knoweth that there will be some among you sick, while
others travel through the earth in quest of the bounties of God; and others
do battle in his cause. Recite therefore so much of it as may be easy. And
observe the Prayers and pay the legal Alms,5 and lend God a liberal loan: for
whatever good works ye send on before for your own behoof, ye shall find with
God. This will be best and richest in the recompense. And seek the
forgiveness of God: verily, God is forgiving, Merciful.


_______________________

1 From the first line of this Sura, and its expressions concerning the Koran,
Prayer, and Future Punishment: from the similarity of the tradition with
regard to its having been preceded by a vision of Gabriel (Beidh., etc.), it
seems to belong to, or at least to describe, a period, perhaps immediately
succeeding the Fatrah, during which the hours of night were spent by Muhammad
in devotion and in the labour of working up his materials in rhythmical and
rhyming Suras, and in preparation for the public assumption of the prophetic
office. Comp. especially verses 11, 19, 20, at the end, with 11, 54, 55, of
the preceding Sura.

2 Singe den Koran laut. H.v.P. Psalle Alcoranum psallendo. Mar. Singe den
Koran mit singender und lauter Stimme ab. Ullm.

3 Lit. most firm, perhaps, distinct.

4 This verse, according to a tradition of Ayesha, was revealed one year later
than the previous part of the Sura. N√∂ldeke says it is "offenbar ein
Medinischer."

5 The reader will not be surprised to find in the very outset of Muhammad's
career a frequent mention of Alms, Prayer, Heaven, Hell, Judgment, Apostles,
etc., in their usual sense, when he remembers that Judaism was extensively
naturalised in Arabia, and Christianity, also, although to a smaller extent.
The words and phrases of these religions were doubtless familiar to the
Meccans, especially to that numerous body who were anxiously searching after
some better religion than the idolatries of their fathers (v. on Sura iii.
19, 60), and provided Muhammad with a copious fund from which to draw.


SURA XCIII.1-THE BRIGHTNESS [IV.]

MECCA.-11 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BY the noon-day BRIGHTNESS,

And by the night when it darkeneth!

Thy Lord hath not forsaken thee, neither hath he been displeased.

And surely the Future shall be better for thee than the Past,

And in the end shall thy Lord be bounteous to thee and thou be satisfied.

Did he not find thee an orphan2 and gave thee a home?

And found thee erring and guided thee,3

And found thee needy and enriched thee.

As to the orphan therefore wrong him not;

And as to him that asketh of thee, chide him not away;

And as for the favours of thy Lord tell them abroad.


_______________________

1 This and the six following Suras are expressions of a state of deep mental
anxiety and depression, in which Muhammad seeks to reassure himself by
calling to mind the past favours of God, and by fixing his mind steadfastly
on the Divine Unity. They belong to a period either before the public
commencement of his ministry or when his success was very dubious, and his
future career by no means clearly marked out.

2 The charge of the orphaned Muhammad was undertaken by Abd-al-Mutalib, his
grandfather, A.D. 576. Hishami, p. 35; Kitab al Wakidi, p. 22, have preserved
traditions of the fondness with which the old man of fourscore years treated
the child, spreading a rug for him under the shadow of the Kaaba, protecting
him from the rudeness of his own sons, etc.

3 Up to his 40th year Muhammad followed the religion of his countrymen. Waq.
Tabari says that when he first entered on his office of Prophet, even his
wife Chadijah had read the Scriptures, and was acquainted with the History of
the Prophets. Spreng. p. 100. But his conformity can only have been partial.


SURA XCIV.-THE OPENING [V.]

MECCA.-8 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HAVE we not OPENED thine heart for thee?

And taken off from thee thy burden,

Which galled thy back?

And have we not raised thy name for thee?

Then verily along with trouble cometh ease.

Verily along with trouble cometh ease.

But when thou art set at liberty, then prosecute thy toil.

And seek thy Lord with fervour.


SURA CXIII.-THE DAYBREAK [VI.]

MECCA OR MEDINA.-5 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

SAY: I betake me for refuge to the Lord of the DAY BREAK

Against the mischiefs of his creation;

And against the mischief of the night when it overtaketh me;

And against the mischief of weird women;1

And against the mischief of the envier when he envieth.

_______________________

1 Lit. who blow on knots. According to some commentators an allusion to a
species of charm. Comp. Virg.Ec. vi. But the reference more probably is to
women in general, who disconcert schemes as thread is disentangled by blowing
upon it. Suras cxiii. are called the el mouwwidhetani, or preservative
chapters, are engraved on amulets,etc.


SURA CXIV.-MEN [VII.]

MECCA OR MEDINA.-6 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

SAY: I betake me for refuge to the Lord of MEN,

The King of men,

The God of men,

Against the mischief of the stealthily withdrawing whisperer,1

Who whispereth in man's breast-

Against djinn and men.

_______________________

1 Satan.


SURA I.1 [VIII.]

MECCA.-7 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

PRAISE be to God, Lord of the worlds!

The compassionate, the merciful!

King on the day of reckoning!

Thee only do we worship, and to Thee do we cry for help.

Guide Thou us on the straight path,2

The path of those to whom Thou hast been gracious;-with whom thou art not
angry, and who go not astray.3


_______________________

1 This Sura, which N√∂ldeke places last, and Muir sixth, in the earliest class
of Meccan Suras, must at least have been composed prior to Sura xxxvii.
182,where it is quoted, and to Sura xv. 87, which refers to it. And it can
scarcely be an accidental circumstance that the words of the first, second,
and fifth verses do not occur in any other Suras of the first Meccan period
as given by N¬îldeke, but frequently in those of the second, which it
therefore, in N¬îldeke, opinion, immediately precedes. But this may be
accounted for by its having been recast for the purposes of private and
public devotion by Muhammad himself, which is the meaning probably of the
Muhammadan tradition that it was revealed twice.  It should also be observed
that, including the auspicatory formula, there are the same number of
petitions in this Sura as in the Lord's Prayer. It is recited several times
in each of the five daily prayers, and on many other occassions, as in
concluding a bargain, etc. It is termed "the Opening of the Book," "the
Completion," "the Sufficing Sura," the Sura of Praise, Thanks, and Prayer,"
"the Healer," "the Remedy," "the Basis," "the Treasure," "the Mother of the
Book," "the Seven Verses of Repetition." The Muhammadans always say "Amen"
after this prayer, Muhammad having been instructed, says the Sonna, to do so
by the Angel Gabriel.

2 Islam

3 The following transfer of this Sura from the Arabic into the corresponding
English characters may give some idea of the rhyming prose in which the Koran
is written:

Bismillahi 'rahhmani 'rrahheem.
El-hamdoo lillahi rabi 'lalameen.
Arrahhmani raheem.
Maliki yowmi-d-deen.
Eyaka naboodoo, wa¬Çyaka nest aeen.
Ihdina 'ssirat almostakeem.
Sirat alezeena anhamta aleihim, gheiri-'l mughdoobi aleihim, wala dsaleen.
Ameen.


SURA CIX.-UNBELIEVERS [IX.]

MECCA.-6 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

SAY: O ye UNBELIEVERS!

I worship not that which ye worship,

And ye do not worship that which I worship;

I shall never worship that which ye worship,

Neither will ye worship that which I worship.

To you be your religion; to me my religion.1


_______________________

1 This Sura is said to have been revealed when Wal√Æd urged Muhammad to
consent that his God should be worshipped at the same time with the old
Meccan deities, or alternately every year. Hish√¢mi, p. 79; Tabari, p. 139. It
is a distinct renunciation of Meccan idolatry, as the following Sura is a
distinct recognition of the Divine Unity.


SURA CXII.-THE UNITY [X.]

MECCA.-4 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

SAY: He is God alone:

God the eternal!

He begetteth not, and He is not begotten;

And there is none like unto Him.


SURA CXI. ABU LAHAB [XI.]

MECCA. 5 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

LET the hands of ABU LAHAB1 perish,and let himself perish!

His wealth and his gains shall avail him not.

Burned shall he be at the fiery flame,2

And his wife laden with fire wood,-

On her neck a rope of palm fibre.


_______________________

1 Undoubtedly one of the earliest Suras, and refers to the rejection of
Muhammad's claim to the prophetic office by his uncle, Abu Lahab, at the
instigation of his wife, Omm Djemil, who is said to have strewn the path of
Muhammad on one occasion with thorns. The following six Suras, like the two
first, have special reference to the difficulties which the Prophet met with
the outset of his career, especially from the rich.

2 In allusion to the meaning of Abu Lahab, father of flame.


SURA CVIII.-THE ABUNDANCE [XII.]

MECCA.-3 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

TRULY we have given thee an ABUNDANCE;

Pray therefore to the Lord, and slay the victims.

Verily whoso hateth thee shall be childless.1


_______________________

1 A reply to those who had taunted Muhammad with the death of his sons, as a
mark of the divine displeasure.


SURA CIV.-THE BACKBITER [XII.]

MECCA.-9 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Woe to every BACKBITER, Defamer!

Who amasseth wealth and storeth it against the future!

He thinketh surely that his wealth shall be with him for ever.

Nay! for verily he shall be flung into the Crushing Fire;

And who shall teach thee what the Crushing Fire is?

It is God's kindled fire,

Which shall mount above the hearts of the damned;

It shall verily rise over them like a vault,

On outstretched columns.


SURA CVII.-RELIGION [XIV.]

MECCA.-7 Verses

In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHAT thinkest thou of him who treateth our RELIGION as a lie?

He it is who trusteth away the orphan,

And stirreth not others up to feed the poor.

Woe to those who pray,

But in their prayer are careless;

Who make a shew of devotion,

But refuse help to the needy.


SURA CII.-DESIRE [XV.]

MECCA.-8 Verses

In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

THE DESIRE of increasing riches occupieth you,

Till ye come to the grave.

Nay! but in the end ye shall know

Nay! once more,in the end ye shall know your folly.

Nay! would that ye knew it with knowledge of certainty!

Surely ye shall see hell-fire.

Then shall ye surely see it with the eye of certainty;

Then shall ye on that day be taken to task concerning pleasures.


SURA XCII.-THE NIGHT [XVI.]

MECCA.-21 Verses

In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BY the NIGHT when she spreads her veil;

By the Day when it brightly shineth;

By Him who made male and female;

At different ends truly do ye aim!1

But as to him who giveth alms and feareth God,

And yieldeth assent to the Good;

To him will we make easy the path to happiness.

But as to him who is covetous and bent on riches,

And calleth the Good a lie,

To him will we make easy the path to misery:

And what shall his wealth avail him when he goeth down?

Truly man¬ís guidance is with Us

And Our¬ís, the Future and the Past.

I warn you therefore of the flaming fire;

None shall be cast to it but the most wretched,-

Who hath called the truth a lie and turned his back.

But the God-fearing shall escape it,-

Who giveth away his substance that he may become pure;2

And who offereth not favours to any one for the sake of recompense,

But only as seeking the face of his Lord the Most High.

And surely in the end he shall be well content.


_______________________

1  See Pref., p. 5, line I.
2  Comp. Luke xi. 41.  Muhammad perhaps derived this view of the meritorious
anture of almsgiving from the Jewish oral law.


SURA LXVIII.-THE PEN [XVII.]

Mecca.-52 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Nun.1 By the PEN2 and by what they write,

Thou, O Prophet; by the grace of thy Lord art not possessed!3

And truly a boundless recompense doth await thee,

For thou art of a noble nature.4

But thou shalt see and they shall see Which of you is the demented.

Now thy Lord! well knoweth He the man who erreth from his path, and well doth
he know those who have yielded to Guidance;

Give not place, therefore, to those who treat thee as a liar:

They desire thee to deal smoothly with them: then would they be smooth as oil
with thee:

But yield not to the man of oaths, a despicable person,

Defamer, going about with slander,

Hinderer of the good, transgressor, criminal,

Harsh-beside this, impure by birth,

Though a man of riches and blessed with sons.

Who when our wondrous verses are recited to him saith-"Fables of the
ancients."

We will brand him on the nostrils.

Verily, we have proved them (the Meccans) as we proved the owners of the
garden, when they swore that at morn they would cut its fruits;

But added no reserve.5

Wherefore an encircling desolation from thy Lord swept round it while they
slumbered,

And in the morning it was like a garden whose fruits had all been cut.

Then at dawn they called to each other,

"Go out early to your field, if ye would cut your dates."

So on they went whispering to each other,

"No poor man shall set foot this day within your garden;"

And they went out at daybreak with this settled purpose.

But when they beheld it, they said, "Truly we have been in fault:

Yes! we are forbidden our fruits."

The most rightminded of them said, "Did I not say to you, Will ye not give
praise to God?"

They said, "Glory to our Lord! Truly we have done amiss."

And they fell to blaming one another:

They said, "Oh woe to us! we have indeed transgressed!

Haply our Lord will give us in exchange a better garden than this: verily we
crave it of our Lord."

Such hath been our chastisement-but heavier shall be the chastisement of the
next world. Ah! did they but know it.

Verily, for the God-fearing are gardens of delight in the presence of their
Lord.

Shall we then deal with those who have surrendered themselves to God, as with
those who offend him?

What hath befallen you that ye thus judge?

Have ye a Scripture wherein ye can search out

That ye shall have the things ye choose?

Or have ye received oaths which shall bind Us even until the day of the
resurrection, that ye shall have what yourselves judge right?

Ask them which of them will guarantee this?

Or is it that they have joined gods with God? let them produce those
associate-gods of theirs, if they speak truth.

On the day when men's legs shall be bared,6 and they shall be called upon to
bow in adoration, they shall not be able:

Their looks shall be downcast: shame shall cover them: because, while yet in
safety, they were invited to bow in worship, but would not obey.

Leave me alone therefore with him who chargeth this revelation with
imposture. We will lead them by degrees to their ruin; by ways which they
know not;

Yet will I bear long with them; for my plan is sure.

Askest thou any recompense from them? But they are burdened with debt.

Are the secret things within their ken? Do they copy them from the Book of
God?

Patiently then await the judgment of thy Lord, and be not like him who was in
the fish,7 when in deep distress he cried to God.

Had not favour from his Lord reached him, cast forth would he have been on
the naked shore, overwhelmed with shame:

But his Lord chose him and made him of the just.

Almost would the infidels strike thee down with their very looks when they
hear the warning of the Koran. And they say, "He is certainly possessed."

Yet is it nothing less than a warning for all creatures.


_______________________

1 It has been conjectured that as the word Nun means fish, there may be a
reference to the fish which swallowed Jonas (v. 48). The fact, however, is
that the meaning of this and of the similar symbols, throughout the Koran,
was unknown to the Muhammadans themselves even in the first century. Possibly
the letters Ha, Mim, which are prefixed to numerous successive Suras were
private marks, or initial letters, attached by their proprietor to the copies
furnished to Said when effecting his recension of the text under Othman. In
the same way, the letters prefixed to other Suras may be monograms, or
abbreviations, or initial letters of the names of the persons to whom the
copies of the respective Suras belonged.

addenda: The symbol nun may possibly refer to this letter as forming the
Rhyme in most of the verses of this Sura.

2 This Sura has been supposed by ancient Muslim authorities to be, if not the
oldest, the second revelation, and to have followed Sura xcvi. But this
opinion probably originated from the expression in v. 1 compared with Sura
xcvi. 4. Verses 17-33 read like a later addition, and this passage, as well
as verse 48-50, has been classed with the Medina revelations. In the absence
of any reliable criterion for fixing the date, I have placed this Sura with
those which detail the opposition encountered by the Prophet at Mecca.

3 By djinn. Comp. Sur. xxxiv. 45.

4 In bearing the taunts of the unbelievers with patience.

5 They did not add the restriction, if God will.

6 An expression implying a grievous calamity; borrowed probably from the
action of stripping previous to wrestling, swimming, etc.

7 Lit. the companion of the fish. Comp. on Jonah Sura xxxvii. 139-148, and
Sura xxi. 87.


SURA XC.-THE SOIL [XVIII.]

MECCA.-20 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

I NEED not to swear by this SOIL,

This soil on which thou dost dwell,

Or by sire and offspring!1

Surely in trouble have we created man.

What! thinketh he that no one hath power over him?

"I have wasted," saith he, "enormous riches!"

What! thinketh he that no one regardeth him?

What! have we not made him eyes,

And tongue, and lips,

And guided him to the two highways?2

Yet he attempted not the steep.

And who shall teach thee what the steep is?

It is to ransom the captive,3

Or to feed in the day of famine,

The orphan who is near of kin, or the poor that lieth in the dust;

Beside this, to be of those who believe, and enjoin stedfastness on each
other, and enjoin compassion on each other.

These shall be the people of the right hand:

While they who disbelieve our signs,

Shall be the people of the left.

Around them the fire shall close.


_______________________

1 Lit. and begetter and what he hath begotten

2 Of good and evil.

3 Thus we read in Hilchoth Matt'noth Aniim, c. 8, "The ransoming of captives
takes precedence of the feeding and clothing of the poor, and there is no
commandment so great as this."


SURA CV.-THE ELEPHANT [XIX.]

MECCA.-5 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HAST thou not seen1 how thy Lord dealt with the army of the ELEPHANT?

Did he not cause their stratagem to miscarry?

And he sent against them birds in flocks (ababils),

Claystones did they hurl down upon them,

And he made them like stubble eaten down!


_______________________

1 This Sura is probably Muhammad's appeal to the Meccans, intended at the
same time for his own encouragement, on the ground of their deliverance from
the army of Abraha, the Christian King of Abyssinia and Arabia Felix, said to
have been lost in the year of Muhammad's birth in an expedition against Mecca
for the purpose of destroying the Caaba. This army was cut off by small-pox
(Wakidi; Hishami), and there is no doubt, as the Arabic word for small-pox
also means "small stones," in reference to the hard gravelly feeling of the
pustules, what is the true interpretation of the fourth line of this Sura,
which, like many other poetical passages in the Koran, has formed the
starting point for the most puerile and extravagant legends. Vide Gibbon's
Decline and Fall, c. 1. The small-pox first shewed itself in Arabia at the
time of the invasion by Abraha. M. de Hammer Gemaldesaal, i. 24. Reiske
opusc. Med. Arabum. Hal¬ë, 1776, p. 8.


SURA CVI.-THE KOREISCH [XX.]

MECCA.-4 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

For the union of the KOREISCH:-

Their union in equipping caravans winter and summer.

And let them worship the Lord of this house, who hath provided them with food
against hunger,

And secured them against alarm.1


_______________________

1 In allusion to the ancient inviolability of the Haram, or precinct round
Mecca. See Sura, xcv. n. p. 41. This Sura, therefore, like the preceding, is
a brief appeal to the Meccans on the ground of their peculiar privileges.


SURA XCVII.-POWER [XXI.]

MECCA.-5 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

VERILY, we have caused It1 to descend on the night of POWER.

And who shall teach thee what the night of power is?

The night of power excelleth a thousand months:

Therein descend the angels and the spirit by permission of their Lord for
every matter;2

And all is peace till the breaking of the morn.


_______________________

1 The Koran, which is now pressed on the Meccans with increased prominence,
as will be seen in many succeeding Suras of this period.

2 The night of Al Kadr is one of the last ten nights of Ramadhan, and as is
commonly believed the seventh of those nights reckoning backward. See Sura
xliv. 2. "Three books are opened on the New Year's Day, one of the perfectly
righteous, one of the perfectly wicked, one of the intermediate. The
perfectly righteous are inscribed and sealed for life," etc. Bab. Talm. Rosh.
Hash., ¬ß I.


SURA LXXXVI. THE NIGHT-COMER [XXII.]

MECCA. 17 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BY the heaven, and by the NIGHT-COMER!

But who shall teach thee what the night-comer is?

'Tis the star of piercing radiance.

Over every soul is set a guardian.

Let man then reflect out of what he was created.

He was created of the poured-forth germs,

Which issue from the loins and breastbones:

Well able then is God to restore him to life,-

On the day when all secrets shall be searched out,

And he shall have no other might or helper.

I swear by the heaven which accomplisheth its cycle,

And by the earth which openeth her bosom,

That this Koran is a discriminating discourse,

And that it is not frivolous.

They plot a plot against thee,

And I will plot a plot against them.

Deal calmly therefore with the infidels; leave them awhile alone.


SURA XCI.-THE SUN [XXIII.]

MECCA.-15 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BY the SUN and his noonday brightness!

By the Moon when she followeth him!

By the Day when it revealeth his glory!

By the Night when it enshroudeth him!

By the Heaven and Him who built it!

By the Earth and Him who spread it forth!

By a Soul and Him who balanced it,

And breathed into it its wickedness and its piety,

Blessed now is he who hath kept it pure,

And undone is he who hath corrupted it!

Themoud1 in his impiety rejected the message of the Lord,

When the greatest wretch among them rushed up:-

Said the Apostle of God to them,-"The Camel of God! let her drink."

But they treated him as an impostor and hamstrung her.

So their Lord destroyed them for their crime, and visited all alike:

Nor feared he the issue.


_______________________

1 See Sura vii. 33, for the story of Themoud.


SURA LXXX.-HE FROWNED [XXIV.]

MECCA.-42 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HE FROWNED, and he turned his back,1

Because the blind man came to him!

But what assured thee that he would not be cleansed by the Faith,

Or be warned, and the warning profit him?

As to him who is wealthy-

To him thou wast all attention:

Yet is it not thy concern if he be not cleansed:2

But as to him who cometh to thee in earnest,

And full of fears-

Him dost thou neglect.

Nay! but it (the Koran) is a warning;

(And whoso is willing beareth it in mind)

Written on honoured pages,

Exalted, purified,

By the hands of Scribes, honoured, righteous.

Cursed be man! What hath made him unbelieving?

Of what thing did God create him?

Out of moist germs.3

He created him and fashioned him,

Then made him an easy passage from the womb,

Then causeth him to die and burieth him;

Then, when he pleaseth, will raise him again to life.

Aye! but man hath not yet fulfilled the bidding of his Lord.

Let man look at his food:

It was We who rained down the copious rains,

Then cleft the earth with clefts,

And caused the upgrowth of the grain,

And grapes and healing herbs,

And the olive and the palm,

And enclosed gardens thick with trees,

And fruits and herbage,

For the service of yourselves and of your cattle.

But when the stunning trumpet-blast shall arrive,4

On that day shall a man fly from his brother,

And his mother and his father,

And his wife and his children;

For every man of them on that day his own concerns shall be enough.

There shall be faces on that day radiant,

Laughing and joyous:

And faces on that day with dust upon them:

Blackness shall cover them!

These are the Infidels, the Impure.


_______________________

1 We are told in the traditions, etc., that when engaged in converse with
Walid, a chief man among the Koreisch, Muhammad was interrupted by the blind
Abdallah Ibn Omm Makt≈±m, who asked to hear the Koran. The Prophet spoke very
roughly to him at the time, but afterwards repented, and treated him ever
after with the greatest respect. So much so, that he twice made him Governor
of Medina.

2 That is, if he does not embrace Islam, and so become pure from sin, thou
wilt not be to blame; thou art simply charged with the delivery of a message
of warning.

3 Ex spermate.

4 Descriptions of the Day of Judgment now become very frequent. See Sura
lxxxv. p. 42, and almost every Sura to the lv., after which they become
gradually more historical.


SURA LXXXVII.-THE MOST HIGH [XXV.]

MECCA.-19 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

PRAISE the name of thy Lord THE MOST HIGH,

Who hath created and balanced all things,

Who hath fixed their destinies and guideth them,

Who bringeth forth the pasture,

And reduceth it to dusky stubble.

We will teach thee to recite the Koran, nor aught shalt thou forget,

Save what God pleaseth; for he knoweth alike things manifest and hidden;

And we will make easy to thee our easy ways.

Warn, therefore, for the warning is profitable:

He that feareth God will receive the warning,-

And the most reprobate only will turn aside from it,

Who shall be exposed to the terrible fire,

In which he shall not die, and shall not live.

Happy he who is purified by Islam,

And who remembereth the name of his Lord and prayeth.

But ye prefer this present life,

Though the life to come is better and more enduring.

This truly is in the Books of old,

The Books of Abraham1 and Moses.


_______________________

1 Thus the Rabbins attribute the Book Jezirah to Abraham. See Fabr. Cod.
Apoc. V. T. p. 349.


SURA XCV.-THE FIG [XXVI.]

MECCA.-8 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

I SWEAR by the FIG and by the olive,

By Mount Sinai,

And by this inviolate soil!1

That of goodliest fabric we created man,

Then brought him down to be the lowest of the low;-

Save who believe and do the things that are right, for theirs shall be a
reward that faileth not.

Then, who after this shall make thee treat the Judgment as a lie?

What! is not God the most just of judges?


_______________________

1 In allusion to the sacredness of the territory of Mecca. This valley in
about the fourth century of our ¬ëra was a kind of sacred forest of 37 miles
in circumference, and called Haram a name applied to it as early as the time
of Pliny (vi. 32). It had the privilege of asylum, but it was not lawful to
inhabit it, or to carry on commerce within its limits, and its religious
ceremonies were a bond of union to several of the Bedouin tribes of the
Hejaz. The Koreisch had monopolised most of the offices and advantages of the
Haram in the time of Muhammad. See Sprenger's Life of Mohammad, pp. 7 20.


SURA CIII.-THE AFTERNOON [XXVII.]

MECCA.-3 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

I SWEAR by the declining day!

Verily, man's lot is cast amid destruction,1

Save those who believe and do the things which be right, and enjoin truth and
enjoin stedfastness on each other.


_______________________

1 Said to have been recited in the Mosque shortly before his death by
Muhammad. See Weil, p. 328.


SURA LXXXV.-THE STARRY [XXVIII.]

MECCA.-22 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BY the star-bespangled Heaven!1

By the promised Day!

By the witness and the witnessed!2

Cursed the masters of the trench3

Of the fuel-fed fire,

When they sat around it

Witnesses of what they inflicted on the believers!

Nor did they torment them but for their faith in God, the Mighty, the
Praiseworthy:4

His the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth; and God is the witness of
everything.

Verily, those who vexed the believers, men and women, and repented not, doth
the torment of Hell, and the torment of the burning, await.

But for those who shall have believed and done the things that be right, are
the Gardens beneath whose shades the rivers flow. This the immense bliss!

Verily, right terrible will be thy Lord's vengeance!

He it is who produceth all things, and causeth them to return;

And is He the Indulgent, the Loving;

Possessor of the Glorious throne;

Worker of that he willeth.

Hath not the story reached thee of the hosts

Of Pharaoh and Themoud?

Nay! the infields are all for denial:

But God surroundeth them from behind.

Yet it is a glorious Koran,

Written on the preserved Table.


_______________________

1 Lit. By the Heaven furnished with towers, where the angels keep watch;
also, the signs of the Zodiac: this is the usual interpretation. See Sura xv.
15.

2 That is, by Muhammad and by Islam; or, angels and men. See, however, v. 7.

3 Prepared by Dhu Nowas, King of Yemen, A.D. 523, for the Christians. See
Gibbon's Decline and Fall, chap. xii. towards the end. Pocock Sp. Hist. Ar.
p. 62. And thus the comm. generally. But Geiger (p. 192) and N√∂ldeke (p. 77
n.) understand the passage of Dan. iii. But it should be borne in mind that
the Suras of this early period contain very little allusion to Jewish or
Christian legends.

4 Verses 8-11 wear the appearance of a late insertion, on account of their
length, which is a characteristic of the more advanced period. Observe also
the change in the rhymes.


SURA CI.-THE BLOW [XXIX.]

MECCA.-8 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

THE BLOW! what is the Blow?

Who shall teach thee what the Blow is?

The Day when men shall be like scattered moths,

And the mountains shall be like flocks of carded wool,

Then as to him whose balances are heavy-his shall be a life that shall please
him well:

And as to him whose balances are light-his dwelling-place1 shall be the pit.

And who shall teach thee what the pit (El-Hawiya) is?

A raging fire!


_______________________

1 Lit. Mother.


SURA XCIX.-THE EARTHQUAKE [XXX.]

MECCA.-8 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHEN the Earth with her quaking shall quake

And the Earth shall cast forth her burdens,

And man shall say, What aileth her?

On that day shall she tell out her tidings,

Because thy Lord shall have inspired her.

On that day shall men come forward in throngs to behold their works,

And whosoever shall have wrought an atom's weight of good shall behold it,

And whosoever shall have wrought an atom's weight of evil shall behold it.


SURA LXXXII.-THE CLEAVING [XXXI.]

MECCA.-19 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHEN the Heaven shall CLEAVE asunder,

And when the stars shall disperse,

And when the seas1 shall be commingled,

And when the graves shall be turned upside down,

Each soul shall recognise its earliest and its latest actions.

O man! what hath misled thee against thy generous Lord,

Who hath created thee and moulded thee and shaped thee aright?

In the form which pleased Him hath He fashioned thee.

Even so; but ye treat the Judgment as a lie.

Yet truly there are guardians over you-

Illustrious recorders-

Cognisant of your actions.

Surely amid delights shall the righteous dwell,

But verily the impure in Hell-fire:

They shall be burned at it on the day of doom,

And they shall not be able to hide themselves from it.

Who shall teach thee what the day of doom is?

Once more. Who shall teach thee what the day of doom is?

It is a day when one soul shall be powerless for another soul: all
sovereignty on that day shall be with God.


_______________________

1 Salt water and fresh water.


SURA LXXXI.-THE FOLDED UP [XXXII.]

MECCA.-29 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHEN the sun shall be FOLDED UP,1

And when the stars shall fall,

And when the mountains shall be set in motion,

And when the she-camels shall be abandoned,

And when the wild beasts shall be gathered together,2

And when the seas shall boil,

And when souls shall be paired with their bodies,

And when the female child that had been buried alive shall be asked

For what crime she was put to death,3

And when the leaves of the Book shall be unrolled,

And when the Heaven shall be stripped away,4

And when Hell shall be made to blaze,

And when Paradise shall be brought near,

Every soul shall know what it hath produced.

It needs not that I swear by the stars5 of retrograde motions

Which move swiftly and hide themselves away,

And by the night when it cometh darkening on,

And by the dawn when it brighteneth,

That this is the word of an illustrious Messenger,6

Endued with power, having influence with the Lord of the Throne,

Obeyed there by Angels, faithful to his trust,

And your compatriot is not one possessed by djinn;

For he saw him in the clear horizon:7

Nor doth he grapple with heaven's secrets,8

Nor doth he teach the doctrine of a cursed9 Satan.

Whither then are ye going?

Verily, this is no other than a warning to all creatures;

To him among you who willeth to walk in a straight path:

But will it ye shall not, unless as God willeth it,10 the Lord of the worlds.


_______________________

1 Involutus fuerit tenebris. Mar. Or, thrown down.

2 Thus Bab. Talm. Erchin, 3. "In the day to come (i.e., of judgment) all the
beasts will assemble and come, etc."

3 See Sura xvi. 61; xvii. 33.

4 Like a skin from an animal when flayed. The idea is perhaps borrowed from
the Sept. V. of Psalm civ. 2. Vulg. sicut pellem.

5 Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn.

6 Gabriel; of the meaning of whose name the next verse is probably a
paraphrase.

7 Sura 1iii. 7.

8 Like a mere Kahin, or soothsayer.

9 Lit. stoned. Sura iii. 31. This vision or hallucination is one of the few
clearly stated miracles, to which Muhammad appeals in the Koran. According to
the tradition of Ibn-Abbas in Waquidi he was preserved by it from committing
suicide by throwing himself down from Mount Hira, and that after it, God
cheered him and strengthened his heart, and one revelation speedily followed
another.

10 Comp. the doctrine of predestination in Sura 1xxvi. v. 25 to end.


SURA LXXXIV.-THE SPLITTING ASUNDER [XXXIII.]

MECCA.-25 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHEN the Heaven shall have SPLIT ASUNDER

And duteously obeyed its Lord;1

And when Earth shall have been stretched out as a plain,

And shall have cast forth what was in her and become empty,

And duteously obeyed its Lord;

Then verily, O man, who desirest to reach thy Lord, shalt thou meet him.

And he into whose right hand his Book shall be given,

Shall be reckoned with in an easy reckoning,

And shall turn, rejoicing, to his kindred.

But he whose Book shall be given him behind his back2

Shall invoke destruction:

But in the fire shall he burn,

For that he lived joyously among his kindred,

Without a thought that he should return to God.

Yea, but his Lord beheld him.

It needs not therefore that I swear by the sunset redness,

And by the night and its gatherings,

And by the moon when at her full,

That from state to state shall ye be surely carried onward.3

What then hath come to them that they believe not?

And that when the Koran is recited to them they adore not?

Yea, the unbelievers treat it as a lie.

But God knoweth their secret hatreds:

Let their only tidings4 be those of painful punishment;

Save to those who believe and do the things that be right.

An unfailing recompense shall be theirs.


_______________________

1 Lit. and obeyed its Lord, and shall be worthy, or capable, i.e., of
obedience.

2 That is, into his left hand. The Muhammadans believe that the right hand of
the damned will be chained to the neck; the left chained behind the back.

3 From Life to Death, from the Grave to Resurrection, thence to Paradise.

4 The expression is ironical. See Freyt. on the word. Lit. tell them glad
tidings.


SURA C.-THE CHARGERS [XXXIV.]

Mecca.-11 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

By the snorting CHARGERS!

And those that dash off sparks of fire!

And those that scour to the attack at morn!

And stir therein the dust aloft;

And cleave therein their midway through a host!

Truly, Man is to his Lord ungrateful.

And of this he is himself a witness;

And truly, he is vehement in the love of this world's good.

Ah! knoweth he not, that when that which is in the graves shall be laid bare,

And that which is in men's breasts shall be brought forth,

Verily their Lord shall on that day be informed concerning them?


SURA LXXIX.1-THOSE WHO DRAG FORTH [XXXV.]

MECCA.-46 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

By those angels who DRAG FORTH souls with violence,

And by those who with joyous release release them;

By those who swim swimmingly along;

By those who are foremost with foremost speed;2

By those who conduct the affairs of the universe!

One day, the disturbing trumpet-blast shall disturb it,

Which the second blast shall follow:

Men's hearts on that day shall quake:-

Their looks be downcast.

The infidels will say, "Shall we indeed be restored as at first?

What! when we have become rotten bones?"

"This then," say they, "will be a return to loss."

Verily, it will be but a single blast,

And lo! they are on the surface of the earth.

Hath the story of Moses reached thee?

When his Lord called to him in Towa's holy vale:

Go to Pharaoh, for he hath burst all bounds:

And say, "Wouldest thou become just?

Then I will guide thee to thy Lord that thou mayest fear him."

And he showed him a great miracle,-

But he treated him as an impostor, and rebelled;

Then turned he his back all hastily,

And gathered an assembly and proclaimed,

And said, "I am your Lord supreme."

So God visited on him the punishment of this life and of the other.

Verily, herein is a lesson for him who hath the fear of God.

Are ye the harder to create, or the heaven which he hath built?

He reared its height and fashioned it,

And gave darkness to its night, and brought out its light,

And afterwards stretched forth the earth,-

He brought forth from it its waters and its pastures;

And set the mountains firm

For you and your cattle to enjoy.

But when the grand overthrow shall come,

The day when a man shall reflect on the pains that he hath taken,

And Hell shall be in full view of all who are looking on;

Then, as for him who hath transgressed

And hath chosen this present life,

Verily, Hell-that shall be his dwelling-place:

But as to him who shall have feared the majesty of his Lord, and shall have
refrained his soul from lust,

Verily, Paradise-that shall be his dwelling-place.

They will ask thee of "the Hour," when will be its fixed time?

But what knowledge hast thou of it?

Its period is known only to thy Lord;

And thou art only charged with the warning of those who fear it.

On the day when they shall see it, it shall seem to them as though they had
not tarried in the tomb, longer than its evening or its morn.


_______________________

1 This Sura obviously consists of three portions, verses 1-14, 15-26, 27-46,
of which the third is the latest in point of style, and the second, more
detailed than is usual in the Suras of the early period, which allude to
Jewish and other legend only in brief and vague terms. It may therefore be
considered as one of the short and early Suras.

2 Or, By those angels which precede, i.e., the souls of the pious into
Paradise. Or, are beforehand with the Satans and djinn in learning the
decrees of God.


SURA LXXVII.-THE SENT [XXXVI.]

MECCA.-50 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

By the train of THE SENT ones,1

And the swift in their swiftness;

By the scatterers who scatter,

And the distinguishers who distinguish;

And by those that give forth the word

To excuse or warn;

Verily that which ye are promised is imminent.

When the stars, therefore, shall be blotted out,

And when the heaven shall be cleft,

And when the mountains shall be scattered in dust,

And when the Apostles shall have a time assigned them;

Until what day shall that time be deferred?

To the day of severing!

And who shall teach thee what the day of severing is?

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

Have we not destroyed them of old?

We will next cause those of later times to follow them.2

Thus deal we with the evil doers.

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

Have we not created you of a sorry germ,

Which we laid up in a secure place,

Till the term decreed for birth?

Such is our power! and, how powerful are We!

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

Have we not made the earth to hold

The living and the dead?

And placed on it the tall firm mountains, and given you to drink of sweet
water.

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

Begone to that Hell which ye called a lie:-

Begone to the shadows that lie in triple masses;

"But not against the flame shall they shade or help you:"-

The sparks which it casteth out are like towers-

Like tawny camels.

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

On that day they shall not speak,

Nor shall it be permitted them to allege excuses.

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

This is the day of severing, when we will assemble you and your ancestors.

If now ye have any craft try your craft on me.

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

But the god-fearing shall be placed amid shades and fountains,

And fruits, whatsoever they shall desire:

"Eat and drink, with health,3 as the meed of your toils."

Thus recompense we the good.

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

"Eat ye and enjoy yourselves a little while. Verily, ye are doers of evil."

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!

For when it is said to them, bend the knee, they bend it not.

Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture

In what other revelation after this will they believe?


_______________________

1 Lit. by the sent (fem.) one after another. Per missas. Mar. Either angels
following in a continued series; or, winds, which disperse rain over the
earth; or the successive verses of the Koran which disperse truth and
distinguish truth from error.

2 Sura xliv. 40.

3 Maimonides says that the majority of the Jews hope that Messiah shall come
and "raise the dead, and they shall be gathered into Paradise, and there
shall eat and drink and be in good health to all eternity."-Sanhedrin, fol.
119, col. I.


SURA LXXVIII.-THE NEWS [XXXVII.]

MECCA.-41 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Of what ask they of one another?

Of the great NEWS.1

The theme of their disputes.

Nay! they shall certainly knows its truth!

Again. Nay! they shall certainly know it.

Have we not made the Earth a couch?

And the mountains its tent-stakes?

We have created you of two sexes,

And ordained your sleep for rest,

And ordained the night as a mantle,

And ordained the day for gaining livelihood,

And built above you seven solid2 heavens,

And placed therein a burning lamp;

And we send down water in abundance from the rain-clouds,

That we may bring forth by it corn and herbs,

And gardens thick with trees.

Lo! the day of Severance is fixed;

The day when there shall be a blast on the trumpet, and ye shall come in
crowds,

And the heaven shall be opened and be full of portals,

And the mountains shall be set in motion, and melt into thin vapour.

Hell truly shall be a place of snares,

The home of transgressors,

To abide therein ages;

No coolness shall they taste therein nor any drink,

Save boiling water and running sores;

Meet recompense!

For they looked not forward to their account;

And they gave the lie to our signs, charging them with falsehood;

But we noted and wrote down all:

"Taste this then: and we will give you increase of nought but torment."

But, for the God-fearing is a blissful abode,

Enclosed gardens and vineyards;

And damsels with swelling breasts, their peers in age,

And a full cup:

There shall they hear no vain discourse nor any falsehood:

A recompense from thy Lord-sufficing gift!-

Lord of the heavens and of the earth, and of all that between3 them lieth-the
God of Mercy! But not a word shall they obtain from Him.

On the day whereon the Spirit4 and the Angels shall be ranged in order, they
shall not speak: save he whom the God of Mercy shall permit, and who shall
say that which is right.

This is the sure day. Whoso then will, let him take the path of return to his
Lord.

Verily, we warn you of a chastisement close at hand:

The day on which a man shall see the deeds which his hands have sent before
him; and when the unbeliever shall say, "Oh! would I were dust!"


_______________________

1 Of the Resurrection. With regard to the date of this Sura, we can only be
guided (I) by the general style of the earlier portion (to verse 37, which is
analogous to that of the early Meccan Suras; (2) by verse 17, which pre-
supposes lxxvii. 12; (3) by the obviously later style of verse 37 to the end.

2 See Sura ii. 27. This is the title given by the Talmudists to the fifth of
the seven heavens.

3 This phrase is of constant recurrence in the Talmud. Maimonides, Yad Hach.
i. 3, makes it one of the positive commands of the Rabbins to believe "that
there exists a first Being . . .    and that all things existing, Heaven and
Earth, and whatever is between them, exist only through the truth of his
existence."

4 Gabriel.


SURA LXXXVIII.-THE OVERSHADOWING [XXXVIII.]

MECCA.-26 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Hath the tidings of the day that shall OVERSHADOW, reached thee?

Downcast on that day shall be the countenances of some,

Travailing and worn,

Burnt at the scorching fire,

Made to drink from a fountain fiercely boiling.

No food shall they have but the fruit of Darih,1

Which shall not fatten, nor appease their hunger.

Joyous too, on that day, the countenances of others,

Well pleased with their labours past,

In a lofty garden:

No vain discourse shalt thou hear therein:

Therein shall be a gushing fountain,

Therein shall be raised couches,

And goblets ready placed,

And cushions laid in order,

And carpets spread forth.

Can they not look up to the clouds, how they are created;

And to the heaven how it is upraised;

And to the mountains how they are rooted;

And to the earth how it is outspread?

Warn thou then; for thou art a warner only:

Thou hast no authority over them:

But whoever shall turn back and disbelieve,

God shall punish him with the greater punishment.

Verily to Us shall they return;

Then shall it be Our's to reckon with them.


_______________________

1 The name of a bitter, thorny shrub.


SURA LXXXIX.-THE DAYBREAK [XXXIX.]

MECCA.-30 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

By the DAYBREAK and ten nights.1

By that which is double and that which is single,

By the night when it pursues its course!

Is there not in this an oath becoming a man of sense?

Hast thou not seen how thy Lord dealt with Ad,

At Irem adorned with pillars,

Whose like have not been reared in these lands!

And with Themoud who hewed out the rocks in the valley;

And with Pharaoh the impaler;

Who all committed excesses in the lands,

And multiplied wickedness therein.

Wherefore thy Lord let loose on them the scourge of chastisement,2

For thy Lord standeth on a watch tower.

As to man, when his Lord trieth him and honoureth him and is bounteous to
him,

Then saith he, "My Lord honoureth me:"

But when he proveth him and limiteth his gifts to him,

He saith, "My Lord despiseth me."

Aye. But ye honour not the orphan,

Nor urge ye one another to feed the poor,

And ye devour heritages, devouring greedily,

And ye love riches with exceeding love.

Aye. But when the earth shall be crushed with crushing, crushing,

And thy Lord shall come and the angels rank on rank,

And Hell on that day shall be moved up,3-Man shall on that day remember
himself. But how shall remembrance help him?

He shall say, Oh! would that I had prepared for this my life! On that day
none shall punish as God punisheth,

And none shall bind with such bonds as He.

Oh, thou soul which art at rest,

Return to thy Lord, pleased, and pleasing him:

Enter thou among my servants,

And enter thou my Paradise.


_______________________

1 Of the sacred month Dhu'lhajja.

2 Or, poured on them the mixed cup of chastisement.

3 The orthodox Muhammadans take this passage literally. Djelal says that hell
will "be dragged up by 70,000 chains, each pulled by 70,000 angels," as if it
were an enormous animal or locomotive engine.


SURA LXXV.-THE RESURRECTION [XL.]

MECCA.-40 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

It needeth not that I swear by the day of the RESURRECTION,

Or that I swear by the self-accusing soul.

Thinketh man that we shall not re-unite his bones?

Aye! his very finger tips are we able evenly to replace.

But man chooseth to deny what is before him:

He asketh, "When this day of Resurrection?"

But when the eye shall be dazzled,

And when the moon shall be darkened,

And the sun and the moon shall be together,1

On that day man shall cry, "Where is there a place to flee to?"

But in vain-there is no refuge-

With thy Lord on that day shall be the sole asylum.

On that day shall man be told of all that he hath done first and last;

Yea, a man shall be the eye witness against himself:

And even if he put forth his plea. . . .2

(Move not thy tongue in haste to follow and master this revelation:3

For we will see to the collecting and the recital of it;

But when we have recited it, then follow thou the recital,

And, verily, afterwards it shall be ours to make it clear to thee.)

Aye, but ye love the transitory,

And ye neglect the life to come.

On that day shall faces beam with light,

Outlooking towards their Lord;

And faces on that day shall be dismal,

As if they thought that some great calamity would befal them.

Aye, when the soul shall come up into the throat,

And there shall be a cry, "Who hath a charm that can restore him?"

And the man feeleth that the time of his departure is come,

And when one leg shall be laid over the other,4

To thy Lord on that day shall he be driven on;

For he believed not, and he did not pray,

But he called the truth a lie and turned his back,

Then, walking with haughty men, rejoined his people.

That Hour is nearer to thee and nearer,5

It is ever nearer to thee and nearer still.

Thinketh man that he shall be left supreme?

Was he not a mere embryo?6

Then he became thick blood of which God formed him and fashioned him;

And made him twain, male and female.

Is not He powerful enough to quicken the dead?


_______________________

1 Lit. shall be united. In the loss of light, or in the rising in the west.-
Beidh.

2 Supply, it shall not be accepted.

3 Verses 16-19 are parenthetic, and either an address to Muhammad by Gabriel
desiring him (I) not to be overcome by any fear of being unable to follow and
retain the revelation of this particular Sura; (2) or, not to interrupt him,
but to await the completion of the entire revelation before he should proceed
to its public recital. In either case we are led to the conclusion that, from
the first, Muhammad had formed the plan of promulging a written book. Comp.
Sura xx. 112.

4 In the death-struggle.

5 Or, Therefore woe to thee, woe! And, again, woe to thee, woe. Thus Sale,
Ullm. Beidhawi; who also gives the rendering in the text, which is that of
Maracci.

6 Nonne fuit humor ex spermate quod spermatizatur.


SURA LXXXIII.-THOSE WHO STINT [XLI.]

MECCA.-36 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Woe to those who STINT the measure:

Who when they take by measure from others, exact the full;

But when they mete to them or weigh to them, minish-

What! have they no thought that they shall be raised again

For the great day?

The day when mankind shall stand before the Lord of the worlds.

Yes! the register of the wicked is in Sidjin.1

And who shall make thee understand what Sidjin is?

It is a book distinctly written.

Woe, on that day, to those who treated our signs as lies,

Who treated the day of judgment as a lie!

None treat it as a lie, save the transgressor, the criminal,

Who, when our signs are rehearsed to him, saith, "Tales of the Ancients!"

Yes; but their own works have got the mastery over their hearts.

Yes; they shall be shut out as by a veil from their Lord on that day;

Then shall they be burned in Hell-fire:

Then shall it be said to them, "This is what ye deemed a lie."

Even so. But the register of the righteous is in Illiyoun.

And who shall make thee understand what Illiyoun is?

A book distinctly written;

The angels who draw nigh unto God attest it.

Surely, among delights shall the righteous dwell!

Seated on bridal couches they will gaze around;

Thou shalt mark in their faces the brightness of delight;

Choice sealed wine shall be given them to quaff,

The seal of musk. For this let those pant who pant for bliss-

Mingled therewith shall be the waters of Tasnim-2

Fount whereof they who draw nigh to God shall drink.

The sinners indeed laugh the faithful to scorn:

And when they pass by them they wink at one another,-

And when they return to their own people, they return jesting,

And when they see them they say, "These are the erring ones."

And yet they have no mission to be their guardians.

Therefore, on that day the faithful shall laugh the infidels to scorn,

As reclining on bridal couches they behold them.

Shall not the infidels be recompensed according to their works?


_______________________

1 Sidjin is a prison in Hell which gives its name to the register of actions
there kept, as Illiyoun, a name of the lofty apartments of Paradise, is
transferred to the register of the righteous.

2 Derived from the root sanima, to be high: this water being conveyed to the
highest apartments in the Pavilions of Paradise.


SURA LXIX.-THE INEVITABLE [XLII.]

MECCA.-52 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

The INEVITABLE!

And who shall make thee comprehend what the Inevitable is?

Themoud and Ad treated the day of Terrors1 as a lie.

So as to Themoud,2 they were destroyed by crashing thunder bolts;

And as to Ad, they were destroyed by a roaring and furious blast.

It did the bidding of God3 against them seven nights and eight days together,
during which thou mightest have seen the people laid low, as though they had
been the trunks of hollow palms;

And couldst thou have seen one of them surviving?

Pharaoh also, and those who flourished before him, and the overthrown cities,
committed sin,-

And disobeyed the Sent one of their Lord; therefore did he chastise them with
an accumulated chastisement.

When the Flood rose high, we bare you in the Ark,

That we might make that event a warning to you, and that the retaining ear
might retain it.

But when one blast shall be blown on the trumpet,

And the earth and the mountains shall be upheaved, and shall both be crushed
into dust at a single crushing,

On that day the woe that must come suddenly shall suddenly come,4

And the heaven shall cleave asunder, for on that day it shall be fragile;

And the angels shall be on its sides, and over them on that day eight shall
bear up the throne of thy Lord.

On that day ye shall be brought before Him: none of your hidden deeds shall
remain hidden:

And he who shall have his book given to him in his right hand, will say to
his friends, "Take ye it; read ye my book;

I ever thought that to this my reckoning I should come."

And his shall be a life that shall please him well,

In a lofty garden,

Whose clusters shall be near at hand:

"Eat ye and drink with healthy relish, as the meed of what ye sent on
beforehand in the days which are past."

But he who shall have his book given into his left hand, will say, "O that my
book had never been given me!

And that I had never known my reckoning!

O that death had made an end of me!

My wealth hath not profited me!

My power hath perished from me!"

"Lay ye hold on him and chain him,

Then at the Hell-fire burn him,

Then into a chain whose length is seventy cubits thrust him;

For he believed not in God, the Great,

And was not careful to feed the poor;

No friend therefore shall he have here this day,

Nor food, but corrupt sores,

Which none shall eat but the sinners."

It needs not that I swear by what ye see,

And by that which ye see not,

That this verily is the word of an apostle worthy of all honour!

And that it is not the word of a poet-how little do ye believe!

Neither is it the word of a soothsayer (Kahin)-how little do ye receive
warning!

It is a missive from the Lord of the worlds.

But if Muhammad had fabricated concerning us any sayings,

We had surely seized him by the right hand,

And had cut through the vein of his neck.5

Nor would We have withheld any one of you from him.

But, verily, It (the Koran) is a warning for the God-fearing;

And we well know that there are of you who treat it as a falsehood.

But it shall be the despair of infidels,

For it is the very truth of sure knowledge.

Praise, then, the name of thy Lord, the Great.


_______________________

1 Thus Beidh., Sale, etc. But with reference to another sense of the root
karaa, it may be rendered the day of decision, the day on which man's lot
shall be decided.

2 On Ad and Themoud. See Sura vii. 63-77.

3 Lit. God subjected it to himself, availed himself of it against them.

4 El-wakia, the sudden event, the calamity; the woe that must break in upon
Heaven and Earth. The same word is used, Sura lvi. 1, and ci. 1, for the
Resurrection and Day of Judgment.

5 In allusion to the mode of executing criminals in many eastern countries.


SURA LI.-THE SCATTERING [XLIII.]

MECCA.-60 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

By the clouds1 which scatter with SCATTERING,

And those which bear their load,

And by those which speed lightly along,

And those which apportion by command!

True, indeed, is that with which ye are threatened,

And lo! the judgment will surely come.2

By the star-tracked heaven!

Ye are discordant in what ye say;

But whose turneth him from the truth, is turned from it by a divine decree.

Perish the liars,

Who are bewildered in the depths of ignorance!

They ask, "When this day of judgment?"

On that day they shall be tormented at the fire.

"Taste ye of this your torment, whose speedy coming ye challenged."

But the God-fearing shall dwell amid gardens and fountains,

Enjoying what their Lord hath given them, because, aforetime they were well-
doers:

But little of the night was it that they slept,

And at dawn they prayed for pardon,

And gave due share of their wealth to the suppliant and the outcast.

On Earth are signs for men of firm belief,

And also in your own selves: Will ye not then behold them?

The Heaven hath sustenance for you, and it containeth that which you are
promised.

By the Lord then of the heaven and of the earth, I swear that this is the
truth, even as ye speak yourselves.3

Hath the story reached thee of Abraham's honoured guests?4

When they went in unto him and said, "Peace!" he replied, "Peace:-they are
strangers."

And he went apart to his family, and brought a fatted calf,

And set it before them. He said, "Eat ye not?"

And he conceived a fear of them. They said to him, "Fear not;" and announced
to him a wise son.

His wife came up with outcry: she smote her face and said, "What I, old and
barren!"

They said, "Thus saith thy Lord. He truly is the Wise, the Knowing."

Said he, "And what, O messengers, is your errand?"

They said, "To a wicked people are we sent,

To hurl upon them stones of clay,

Destined5 by thy Lord for men guilty of excesses."

And we brought forth the believers who were in the city:

But we found not in it but one family of Muslims.

And signs we left in it for those who dread the afflictive chastisement,-

And in Moses: when we sent him to Pharaoh with manifest power:

But relying on his forces6 he turned his back and said, "Sorcerer, or
Possessed."

So we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea; for of all blame
was he worthy.

And in Ad: when we sent against them the desolating blast:

It touched not aught over which it came, but it turned it to dust.

And in Themoud:7 when it was said to them, "Enjoy yourselves for yet a
while."

But they rebelled against their Lord's command: so the tempest took them as
they watched its coming.8

They were not able to stand upright, and could not help themselves.

And we destroyed the people of Noah, before them; for an impious people were
they.

And the Heaven-with our hands have we built it up, and given it its expanse;

And the Earth-we have stretched it out like a carpet; and how

smoothly have we spread it forth!

And of everything have we created pairs: that haply ye may reflect.

Fly then to God: I come to you from him a plain warner.

And set not up another god with God: I come to you from him a plain warner.

Even thus came there no apostle to those who flourished before them, but they
exclaimed, "Sorcerer, or Possessed."

Have they made a legacy to one another of this scoff? Yes, they are a rebel
people.

Turn away, then, from them, and thou shalt not incur reproach:

Yet warn them, for, in truth, warning will profit the believers.

I have not created Djinn and men, but that they should worship me:

I require not sustenance from them, neither require I that they feed me:

Verily, God is the sole sustainer: possessed of might: the unshaken!

Therefore to those who injure thee shall be a fate like the fate of

their fellows of old. Let them not challenge me to hasten it.

Woe then to the infidels, because of their threatened day.


_______________________

1 Lit. (I swear) by those which scatter (i.e., the rain) with a scattering,
(2) and by those which carry a burden, (3) and by those which run lightly,
(4) and by those which divide a matter, or by command. The participles are
all in the feminine: hence some interpret verse 1 of winds; verse 2 of
clouds; verse 3 of ships; verse 4 of angels.

2 Comp. note at Sura lvi. 1, p. 65.

3 That is, this oath is for the confirmation of the truth, as ye are wont to
confirm things one among another by an oath.

4 Comp. Sura xi. 72, and xv. 51. From the want of connection with what
precedes, it is highly probable that the whole passage from verse 24 60 did
not originally form a part of this Sura, but was added at a later period,
perhaps in the recension of the text under Othman.

5 Lit. marked, with the names of the individuals to be slain, say the
commentators.

6 Or, with his nobles.

7 For Ad and Themoud, see Sura xi.

8 That is, in broad daylight. Thus Beidh. Comp. Sura xlvi. 22.


SURA LII.-THE MOUNTAIN [XLIV.]

MECCA.-49 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BY the MOUNTAIN,

And by the Book written

On an outspread roll,

And by the frequented fane,1

And by the lofty vault,

And by the swollen sea,

Verily, a chastisement from thy Lord is imminent,

And none shall put it back.

Reeling on that day the Heaven shall reel,

And stirring shall the mountains stir.2

And woe, on that day, to those who called the apostles liars,

Who plunged for pastime into vain disputes-

On that day shall they be thrust with thrusting to the fire of Hell:-

"This is the fire which ye treated as a lie.

What! is this magic, then? or, do ye not see it?

Burn ye therein: bear it patiently or impatiently 'twill be the same to you:
for ye shall assuredly receive the reward of your doings."

But mid gardens and delights shall they dwell who have feared God,

Rejoicing in what their Lord hath given them; and that from the pain of hell-
fire hath their Lord preserved them.

"Eat and drink with healthy enjoyment, in recompense for your deeds."

On couches ranged in rows shall they recline; and to the damsels with large
dark eyes will we wed them.

And to those who have believed, whose offspring have followed them in the
faith, will we again unite their offspring; nor of the meed of their works
will we in the least defraud them. Pledged to God is every man for his
actions and their desert.3

And fruits in abundance will we give them, and flesh as they shall desire:

Therein shall they pass to one another the cup which shall engender no light
discourse, no motive to sin:

And youths shall go round among them beautiful as imbedded pearls:

And shall accost one another and ask mutual questions.

"A time indeed there was," will they say, "when we were full of care as to
the future lot of our families;

But kind hath God been to us, and from the pestilential torment hath he
preserved us;

For, heretofore we called upon Him-and He is the Beneficent, the Merciful."

Warn thou, then. For thou by the favour of thy Lord art neither soothsayer
nor possessed.

Will they say, "A poet! let us await some adverse turn of his fortune?"

SAY, wait ye, and in sooth I too will wait with you.

Is it their dreams which inspire them with this? or is it that they are a
perverse people?

Will they say, "He hath forged it (the Koran) himself?" Nay, rather it is
that they believed not.

Let them then produce a discourse like it, if they speak the Truth.

Were they created by nothing? or were they the creators of themselves?

Created they the Heavens and Earth? Nay, rather, they have no faith.

Hold they thy Lord's treasures? Bear they the rule supreme?

Have they a ladder for hearing the angels? Let any one who hath heard them
bring a clear proof of it.

Hath God daughters and ye sons?

Asketh thou pay of them? they are themselves weighed down with debts.

Have they such a knowledge of the secret things that they can write them
down?

Desire they to lay snares for thee? But the snared ones shall be they who do
not believe.

Have they any God beside God? Glory be to God above what they join with Him.

And should they see a fragment of the heaven falling down, they would say,
"It is only a dense cloud."

Leave them then until they come face to face with the day when they shall
swoon away:

A day in which their snares shall not at all avail them, neither shall they
be helped.

And verily, beside this is there a punishment for the evildoers: but most of
them know it not.

Wait thou patiently the judgment of thy Lord, for thou art in our eye; and
celebrate the praise of thy Lord when thou risest up,

And in the night-season: Praise him when the stars are setting.


_______________________

1 Of the Caaba.

2 Comp. Psalm lxviii. 9.

3 The more prosaic style of this verse indicates a later origin than the
context. Muir places the whole Sura in what he terms the fourth stage of
Meccan Suras.



SURA LVI.-THE INEVITABLE [XLV.]

MECCA.-96 Verses

In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHEN the day that must come shall have come suddenly,1

None shall treat that sudden coming as a lie:

Day that shall abase! Day that shall exalt!

When the earth shall be shaken with a shock,

And the mountains shall be crumbled with a crumbling,

And shall become scattered dust,

And into three bands shall ye be divided:2

Then the people of the right hand3-Oh! how happy shall be the people of the
right hand!

And the people of the left hand-Oh! how wretched shall be the people of the
left hand!

And they who were foremost on earth-the foremost still.4

These are they who shall be brought nigh to God,

In gardens of delight;

A crowd of the former

And few of the latter generations;

On inwrought couches

Reclining on them face to face:

Aye-blooming youths go round about to them

With goblets and ewers and a cup of flowing wine;

Their brows ache not from it, nor fails the sense:

And with such fruits as shall please them best,

And with flesh of such birds, as they shall long for:

And theirs shall be the Houris, with large dark eyes, like pearls  hidden in
their shells,

In recompense of their labours past.

No vain discourse shall they hear therein, nor charge of sin,

But only the cry, "Peace! Peace!"

And the people of the right hand-oh! how happy shall be the people of the
right hand!

Amid thornless sidrahs5

And talh6 trees clad with fruit,

And in extended shade,

And by flowing waters,

And with abundant fruits,7

Unfailing, unforbidden,

And on lofty couches.

Of a rare creation have we created the Houris,

And we have made them ever virgins,

Dear to their spouses, of equal age with them,8

For the people of the right hand,

A crowd of the former,

And a crowd of the latter generations.9

But the people of the left hand-oh! how wretched shall be the people of the
left hand!

Amid pestilential10 winds and in scalding water,

And in the shadow of a black smoke,

Not cool, and horrid to behold.11

For they truly, ere this, were blessed with worldly goods,

But persisted in heinous sin,

And were wont to say,

"What! after we have died, and become dust and bones, shall we be raised?

And our fathers, the men of yore?"

SAY: Aye, the former and the latter:

Gathered shall they all be for the time of a known day.

Then ye, O ye the erring, the gainsaying,

Shall surely eat of the tree Ez-zakkoum,

And fill your bellies with it,

And thereupon shall ye drink boiling water,

And ye shall drink as the thirsty camel drinketh.

This shall be their repast in the day of reckoning!

We created you, will ye not credit us?12

What think ye? The germs of life13-

Is it ye who create them? or are we their creator?

It is we who have decreed that death should be among you;

Yet are we not thereby hindered14 from replacing you with others, your likes,
or from producing you again in a form which ye know not!

Ye have known the first creation: will ye not then reflect?

What think ye? That which ye sow-

Is it ye who cause its upgrowth, or do we cause it to spring forth?

If we pleased we could so make your harvest dry and brittle that ye would
ever marvel and say,

"Truly we have been at cost,15 yet are we forbidden harvest."

What think ye of the water ye drink?

Is it ye who send it down from the clouds, or send we it down?

Brackish could we make it, if we pleased: will ye not then be thankful?

What think ye? The fire which ye obtain by friction-

Is it ye who rear its tree, or do we rear it?

It is we who have made it for a memorial and a benefit to the wayfarers of
the desert,

Praise therefore the name of thy Lord, the Great.

It needs not that I swear by the setting of the stars,

And it is a great oath, if ye knew it,

That this is the honourable Koran,

Written in the preserved Book:16

Let none touch it but the purified,17

It is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.

Such tidings as these will ye disdain?

Will ye make it your daily bread to gainsay them?

Why, at the moment when the soul of a dying man shall come up into his
throat,

And when ye are gazing at him,

Though we are nearer to him than ye, although ye see us not:-

Why do ye not, if ye are to escape the judgment,

Cause that soul to return? Tell me, if ye speak the truth.

But as to him who shall enjoy near access to God,

His shall be repose, and pleasure, and a garden of delights.

Yea, for him who shall be of the people of the right hand,

Shall be the greeting from the people of the right hand-"Peace be to thee."

But for him who shall be of those who treat the prophets as deceivers,

And of the erring,

His entertainment shall be of scalding water,

And the broiling of hell-fire.

Verily this is a certain truth:

Praise therefore the name of thy Lord, the Great.


_______________________

1 The renderings of Mar. cum inciderit casura, or as in Sur. lxix, 15,
ingruerit ingruens nearly express the peculiar force of the Arabic verb and
of the noun formed from it; i.e. a calamity that falls suddenly and surely.
Weil renders, ween der Auferstehung's Tag eintritt (p. 389). Lane, when the
calamity shall have happened.

2 Comp. Tr. Rosch Haschanah, fol. 16, 6.

3 Lit., the companions of the right hand, what shall be the companions of the
right hand! and thus in verses 9, 37, 40.

4 Lit., the preceders, the preceders.

5 See Sura liii. 14, p. 69.

6 Probably the banana according to others, the acacia gummifera.

7 "A Muslim of some learning professed to me that he considered the
descriptions of Paradise in the Koran to be, in a great measure, figurative;
'like those,' said he, 'in the book of the Revelation of St. John;' and he
assured me that many learned Muslims were of the same opinion." Lane's Modern
Egyptians, i. p. 75, note.

8 Like them, grow not old.

9 This seems a direct contradiction to verse 14, unless we suppose with
Beidhawi that an inferior and more numerous class of believers are here
spoken of.

10 Or, scorching.

11 Lit., not noble, agreeable in appearance.

12 As to the resurrection.

13 Lit., semen quod emittitis.

14 Lit., forestalled, anticipated.

15 Lit, have incurred debt.

16 That is, The Prototype of the Koran written down in the Book kept by God
himself.

17 This passage implies the existence of copies of portions at least of the
Koran in common use. It was quoted by the sister of Omar when at his
conversion be desired to take her copy of Sura xx. into his hands.


SURA1-LIII. THE STAR [XLVI.]

MECCA.-62 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

By the STAR when it setteth,

Your compatriot erreth not, nor is he led astray,

Neither speaketh he from mere impulse.

The Koran is no other than a revelation revealed to him:

One terrible in power2 taught it him,

Endued with wisdom. With even balance stood he

In the highest part of the horizon:

Then came he nearer and approached,

And was at the distance of two bows, or even closer,-

And he revealed to his servant what he revealed.

His heart falsified not what he saw.

What! will ye then dispute with him as to what he saw?

He had seen him also another time,

Near the Sidrah-tree, which marks the boundary.3

Near which is the garden of repose.

When the Sidrah-tree4 was covered with what covered it,5

His eye turned not aside, nor did it wander:

For he saw the greatest of the signs of his Lord.

Do you see Al-Lat and Al-Ozza,6

And Manat the third idol besides?7

What? shall ye have male progeny and God female?

This were indeed an unfair partition!

These are mere names: ye and your fathers named them thus: God hath not sent
down any warranty in their regard. A mere conceit and their own impulses do
they follow. Yet hath "the guidance" from their Lord come to them.

Shall man have whatever he wisheth?

The future and the present are in the hand of God:

And many as are the Angels in the Heavens, their intercession shall be of no
avail8

Until God hath permitted it to whom he shall please and will accept.

Verily, it is they who believe not in the life to come, who name the angels
with names of females:

But herein they have no knowledge: they follow a mere conceit; and mere
conceit can never take the place of truth.

Withdraw then from him who turneth his back on our warning and desireth only
this present life.

This is the sum of their knowledge. Truly thy Lord best knoweth him who
erreth from his way, and He best knoweth him who hath received guidance.

And whatever is in the Heavens and in the Earth is God's that he may reward
those who do evil according to their deeds: and those who do good will He
reward with good things.

To those who avoid great crimes and scandals but commit only lighter faults,
verily, thy Lord will be diffuse of mercy. He well knew you when he produced
you out of the earth, and when ye were embryos in your mother's womb. Assert
not then your own purity. He best knoweth who feareth him.

Hast thou considered him who turned his back?

Who giveth little and is covetous?

Is it that he hath the knowledge and vision of the secret things?

Hath he not been told of what is in the pages of Moses?

And of Abraham faithful to his pledge?

That no burdened soul shall bear the burdens of another,

And that nothing shall be reckoned to a man but that for which he hath made
efforts:

And that his efforts shall at last be seen in their true light:

That then he shall be recompensed with a most exact recompense,

And that unto thy Lord is the term of all things,

And that it is He who causeth to laugh and to weep,

And that He causeth to die and maketh alive,

And that He hath created the sexes, male and female,

From the diffused germs of life,9

And that with Him is the second creation,

And that He enricheth and causeth to possess,

And that He is the Lord of Sirius,10

And that it was He who destroyed the ancient Adites,

And the people of Themoud and left not one survivor,

And before them the people of Noah who were most wicked and most perverse.

And it was He who destroyed the cities that were overthrown.

So that that which covered them covered them.

Which then of thy Lord's benefits wilt thou make a matter of doubt?11

He who warneth you is one of the warners of old.

The day that must draw nigh, draweth nigh already: and yet none but God can
reveal its time.

Is it at these sayings that ye marvel?

And that ye laugh and weep not?

And that ye are triflers?

Prostrate yourselves then to God and worship.


_______________________

1 This Sura was revealed at about the time of the first emigration of
Muhammad's followers to Abyssinia, A. 5. The manner in which the Prophet
cancelled the objectionable verses 19, 20, is the strongest proof of his
sincerity (as also is the opening of Sura 1xxx.) at this period. Had he not
done so, nothing would have been easier for him than to have effected a
reconciliation with the powerful party in Mecca, who had recently compelled
his followers to emigrate.

2 The Angel Gabriel, to the meaning of whose name, as the strong one of God,
these words probably allude.

3 That is, Beyond which neither men nor angels can pass (Djelal). The
original word is also rendered, the Lote-Tree of the extremity, or of the
loftiest spot in Paradise, in the seventh Heaven, on the right hand of the
throne of God. Its leaves are fabled to be as numerous as the members of the
whole human family, and each leaf to bear the name of an individual. This
tree is shaken on the night of the 15th of Ramadan every year a little after
sunset, when the leaves on which are inscribed the names of those who are to
die in the ensuing year fall, either wholly withered, or with more or less
green remaining, according to the months or weeks the person has yet to live.

4 The Sidrah is a prickly plum, which is called Ber in India, the zizyphus
Jujuba of Linnƒáus. A decoction of the leaves is used in India to wash the
dead, on account of the sacredness of the tree.

5 Hosts of adoring angels, by which the tree was masked.

6 Al-Lat or El-Lat, probably the Alilat of Herodotus (iii. 8) was an idol at
Nakhlah, a place east of the present site of Mecca. Al-Ozza was an idol of
the Kinanah tribe; but its hereditary priests were the Banu Solaym, who were
stationed along the mercantile road to Syria in the neighbourhood of Chaibar.

7 When at the first recital of this Sura, the prophet had reached this verse,
he continued,

These are the exalted females, [or, sublime swans, i.e., mounting nearer and
nearer to God]

And truly their intercession may be expected.

These words, however, which were received by the idolaters with great
exultation, were disowned by Muhammad in the course of a few days as a
Satanic suggestion, and replaced by the text as it now stands. The
probability is that the difficulties of his position led him to attempt a
compromise of which he speedily repented. In the Suras subsequent to this
period the denunciations of idolatry become much sterner and clearer. The
authorities are given by Weil, Sprenger and Muir. See Sura [lxvii.] xvii. 74-
76.

8 Verses 26-33 are probably later than the previous part of the Sura, but
inserted with reference to it. Some (as Omar b. Muhammad and 1tq.) consider
verse 33, or (as Itq.36) verses 34-42, or (as Omar b. Muhammad) the whole
Sura, to have originated at Medina.

9 Ex spermate cum seminatum fuerit.

10 The Dog-star, worshipped by the Arabians.

11 Compare the refrain in Sura lv. p. 74.


SURA LXX.-THE STEPS OR ASCENTS [XLVII.]

MECCA.-44 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

A SUITOR sued1 for punishment to light suddenly

On the infidels: none can hinder

God from inflicting it, the master of those ASCENTS,

By which the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day, whose length is
fifty thousand years.2

Be thou patient therefore with becoming patience;

They forsooth regard that day as distant,

But we see it nigh:

The day when the heavens shall become as molten brass,

And the mountains shall become like flocks of wool:

And friend shall not question of friend,

Though they look at one another. Fain would the wicked redeem himself from
punishment on that day at the price of his children,

Of his spouse and his brother,

And of his kindred who shewed affection for him,

And of all who are on the earth that then it might deliver him.

But no. For the fire,

Dragging by the scalp,

Shall claim him who turned his back and went away,

And amassed and hoarded.

Man truly is by creation hasty;

When evil befalleth him, impatient;

But when good falleth to his lot, tenacious.

Not so the prayerful,

Who are ever constant at their prayers;

And of whose substance there is a due and stated portion

For him who asketh, and for him who is ashamed3 to beg;

And who own the judgment-day a truth,

And who thrill with dread at the chastisement of their Lord-

For there is none safe from the chastisement of their Lord-

And who control their desires,

(Save with their wives or the slaves whom their right hands have won, for
there they shall be blameless;

But whoever indulge their desires beyond this are transgressors);

And who are true to their trusts and their engagements,

And who witness uprightly,

And who keep strictly the hours of prayer:

These shall dwell, laden with honours, amid gardens.

But what hath come to the unbelievers that they run at full stretch around
thee,

On the right hand and on the left, in bands?

Is it that every man of them would fain enter that garden of delights?

Not at all. We have created them, they know of what.

It needs not that I swear by the Lord of the East and of the West4 that we
have power.

To replace them with better than themselves: neither are we to be hindered.

Wherefore let them flounder on and disport them, till they come face to face
with their threatened day,

The day on which they shall flock up out of their graves in haste like men
who rally to a standard:-

Their eyes downcast; disgrace shall cover them. Such their threatened day.


_______________________

1 Lit. asking one asked; probably some unbeliever, with reference to the
opening of Sura lvi., p. 60, or like statements in some previous Sura.

2 The expression is hyperbolical, and, as such, identical with Sura [lxx.]
xxxii. 4. Compare also Sura xcvii., p. 37. where the descent is said to take
place in a single night.

3 Lit. forbidden or prevented by shame.

4 See next Sura. v. 16.


SURA LV.-THE MERCIFUL [XLVIII.]

MECCA.-78 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

The God of MERCY hath taught the Koran,

Hath created man,

Hath taught him articulate speech,

The Sun and the Moon have each their times,

And the plants and the trees bend in adoration.

And the Heaven, He hath reared it on high, and hath appointed the balance;

That in the balance ye should not transgress.

Weigh therefore with fairness, and scant not the balance.

And the Earth, He hath prepared it for the living tribes:

Therein are fruits, and the palms with sheathed clusters,

And the grain with its husk, and the fragrant plants.

Which then of the bounties of your Lord will ye twain1 deny?

He created man of clay like that of the potter.

And He created the djinn of pure fire:

Which then of the bounties, etc.

He is the Lord of the East,2

He is the Lord of the West:

Which, etc.

He hath let loose the two seas3 which meet each other:

Yet between them is a barrier which they overpass not:

Which, etc.

From each he bringeth up pearls both great and small:

Which, etc.

And His are the ships towering up at sea like mountains:

Which, etc.

All on the earth shall pass away,

But the face of thy Lord shall abide resplendent with majesty and glory:

Which, etc.

To Him maketh suit all that is in the Heaven and the Earth. Every day doth
some new work employ Him:

Which, etc.

We will find leisure to judge you, O ye men and djinn:4

Which, etc.

O company of djinn and men, if ye can overpass the bounds of the Heavens and
the Earth, then overpass them. But by our leave only shall ye overpass them:

Which, etc.

A bright flash of fire shall be hurled at you both, and molten brass, and ye
shall not defend yourselves from it:

Which, etc.

When the Heaven shall be cleft asunder, and become rose red, like stained
leather:

Which, etc.

On that day shall neither man nor djinn be asked of his sin:

Which, etc.

By their tokens shall the sinners be known, and they shall be seized by their
forelocks and their feet:

Which, etc.

"This is Hell which sinners treated as a lie."

To and fro shall they pass between it and the boiling water:

Which, etc.

But for those who dread the majesty of their Lord shall be two gardens:

Which, etc.

With o'erbranching trees in each:

Which, etc.

In each two kinds of every fruit:

Which, etc.

On couches with linings of brocade shall they recline, and the fruit of the
two gardens shall be within easy reach:

Which, etc.

Therein shall be the damsels with retiring glances, whom nor man nor djinn
hath touched before them:

Which, etc.

Like jacynths and pearls:

Which, etc.

Shall the reward of good be aught but good?

Which, etc.

And beside these shall be two other gardens:5

Which, etc.

Of a dark green:

Which, etc.

With gushing fountains in each:

Which, etc.

In each, fruits and the palm and the pomegranate:

Which, etc.

In each, the fair, the beauteous ones:

Which, etc.

With large dark eyeballs, kept close in their pavilions:

Which, etc.

Whom man hath never touched, nor any djinn:6

Which, etc.

Their spouses on soft green cushions and on beautiful carpets shall recline:

Which, etc.

Blessed be the name of thy Lord, full of majesty and glory.


_______________________

1 Men and djinn. The verb is in the dual.

2 Lit. of the two easts, of the two wests, i.e., of all that lies between the
extreme points at which the sun rises and sets at the winter and summer
solstices.

3 Lit. he hath set at large, poured forth over the earth the masses of fresh
and salt water which are in contact at the mouths of rivers, etc. See Sura
[lxviii.] xxvii. 62; [lxxxvi.] xxxv. 13.

4 Lit. O ye two weights; hence, treasures; and, generally, any collective
body of men or things.

5 One for men, the other for the Genii; or, two for each man and Genius; or,
both are for the inferior classes of Muslims. Beidh.

6 It should be remarked that these promises of the Houris of Paradise are
almost exclusively to be found in Suras written at a time when Muhammad had
only a single wife of 60 years of age, and that in all the ten years
subsequent to the Hejira, women are only twice mentioned as part of the
reward of the faithful. Suras ii. 23 and iv. 60. While in Suras xxxvi. 56;
xliii. 70; xiii. 23; xl. 8 the proper wives of the faithful are spoken of as
accompanying their husbands into the gardens of bliss.


SURA LIV.-THE MOON [XLIX.]

MECCA.-55 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

The hour hath approached and the MOON hath been cleft:

But whenever they see a miracle they turn aside and say, This is well-devised
magic.

And they have treated the prophets as impostors, and follow their own lusts;
but everything is unalterably fixed.

A message of prohibition had come to them-

Consummate wisdom-but warners profit them not.

Quit them then. On the day when the summoner shall summon to a stern
business,

With downcast eyes shall they come forth from their graves, as if they were
scattered locusts,

Hastening to the summoner. "This," shall the infidels say, "is the
distressful day."

Before them the people of Noah treated the truth as a lie. Our servant did
they charge with falsehood, and said, "Demoniac!" and he was rejected.

Then cried he to his Lord, "Verily, they prevail against me; come thou
therefore to my succour."

So we opened the gates of Heaven with water which fell in torrents,

And we caused the earth to break forth with springs, and their waters met by
settled decree.

And we bare him on a vessel made with planks and nails.

Under our eyes it floated on: a recompence to him who had been rejected with
unbelief.

And we left it a sign: but, is there any one who receives the warning?

And how great was my vengeance and my menace!

Easy for warning have we made the Koran-but, is there any one who receives
the warning?

The Adites called the truth a lie: but how great was my vengeance and my
menace;

For we sent against them a roaring wind in a day of continued distress:

It tore men away as though they were uprooted palm stumps.

And how great was my vengeance and my menace!

Easy for warning have we made the Koran-but, is there any one who receives
the warning?

The tribe of Themoud treated the threatenings as lies:

And they said, "Shall we follow a single man from among ourselves? Then
verily should we be in error and in folly.

To him alone among us is the office of warning entrusted? No! he is an
impostor, an insolent person."

To-morrow shall they learn who is the impostor, the insolent.

"For we will send the she-camel to prove them: do thou mark them well, O
Saleh, and be patient:

And foretell them that their waters shall1 be divided between themselves and
her, and that every draught shall come by turns to them."

But they called to their comrade, and he took a knife and ham-strung her.

And how great was my vengeance and my menance!

We sent against them a single shout; and they became like the dry sticks of
the fold-builders.

Easy have we made the Koran for warning-but, is there any one who receives
the warning?

The people of Lot treated his warning as a lie;

But we sent a stone-charged wind against them all, except the family of Lot,
whom at daybreak we delivered,

By our special grace-for thus we reward the thankful.

He, indeed, had warned them of our severity, but of that warning they
doubted.

Even this guess did they demand: therefore we deprived them of sight,

And said, "Taste ye my vengeance and my menace;"

And in the morning a relentless punishment overtook them.

Easy have we made the Koran for warning but, is there any one who receives
the warning?

To the people of Pharaoh also came the threatenings:

All our miracles did they treat as impostures. Therefore seized we them as he
only can seize, who is the Mighty, the Strong.

Are your infidels, O Meccans, better men than these? Is there an exemption
for you in the sacred Books?

Will they say, "We are a host that lend one another aid?"

The host shall be routed, and they shall turn them back.

But, that Hour is their threatened time, and that Hour shall be most severe
and bitter.

Verily, the wicked are sunk in bewilderment and folly.

On that day they shall be dragged into the fire on their faces. "Taste ye the
touch of Hell."

All things have we created after a fixed decree:

Our command was but one word, swift as the twinkling of an eye.

Of old, too, have we destroyed the like of you-yet is any one warned?

And everything that they do is in the Books;2

Each action, both small and great, is written down.

Verily, amid gardens3 and rivers shall the pious dwell.

In the seat of truth, in the presence of the potent King.


_______________________

1 See Sura [lvi.] xxvi. 155; also Sura [lxxxvii.] vii. 71.

2 Kept by the Guardian Angels.

3 The Talmudic descriptions of the Gardens-for the later Jews believed in
more than one Paradise-and of the rivers and trees therein, will be found in
Schr der Talm. Rabb. Judenthum, pp. 418-432.


SURA XXXVII.-THE RANKS [L.]

MECCA.-182 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

By the angels ranged in order for Songs of Praise,

And by those who repel demons,1

And by those who recite the Koran for warning,

Truly your God is but one,

Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth, and of all that is between them, and
Lord of the East.2

We have adorned the lower heaven with the adornment of the stars.

They serve also as a guard against every rebellious Satan,

That they overhear not what passeth in the assembly on high, for they are
darted at from every side,3

Driven off and consigned to a lasting torment;

While, if one steal a word by stealth, a glistening flame pursueth him.

Ask the Meccans then, Are they, or the angels whom we have made, the stronger
creation? Aye, of coarse clay have we created them.

But while thou marvellest they mock;

When they are warned, no warning do they take;

And when they see a sign, they fall to mocking,

And say, "This is no other than clear sorcery:

What! when dead, and turned to dust and bones, shall we indeed be raised?

Our sires also of olden times?"

Say, Yes; and ye shall be covered with disgrace.

For, one blast only, and lo! they shall gaze around them, And shall say, "Oh!
woe to us! this is the day of reckoning; This is the day of decision which ye
gainsaid as an untruth."

Gather together those who have acted unjustly, and their consorts,4 and the
gods whom they adored

Beside God; and guide them to the road for Hell.

Set them forth: they shall be questioned.

"How now, that ye help not one another?"

But on this day they shall submit themselves to God,

And shall address one another with mutual reproaches.

They shall say, "In sooth, ye came to us in well-omened sort:"5

But they will answer, "Nay, it was ye who would not believe; and we had no
power whatever over you. Nay, ye were people given to transgress;

Just, therefore, is the doom which our Lord hath passed upon us.6 We shall
surely taste it:

We made you err, for we had erred ourselves."

Partners therefore shall they be in punishment on that day.

Truly, thus will we deal with the wicked,

Because when it was said to them, There is no God but God, they swelled with
pride,

And said, "Shall we then abandon our gods for a crazed poet?"

Nay, he cometh with truth and confirmeth the Sent Ones of old.

Ye shall surely taste the painful punishment,

And ye shall not be rewarded but as ye have wrought,

Save the sincere servants of God!

A stated banquet shall they have

Of fruits; and honoured shall they be

In the gardens of delight,

Upon couches face to face.

A cup shall be borne round among them from a fountain,

Limpid, delicious to those who drink;

It shall not oppress the sense, nor shall they therewith be drunken.

And with them are the large-eyed ones with modest refraining glances, fair
like the sheltered egg.7

And they shall address one another with mutual questions.

Saith one of them, "I truly had a bosom friend,

Who said, 'Art thou of those who credit it?

What! when we shall have died, and become dust and bones, shall we indeed be
judged?"'

He shall say to those around him, "Will ye look?"

And he shall look and see him in the midst of Hell.

And he shall say to him, "By God, thou hadst almost caused me to perish;

And, but for the favour of my Lord, I had surely been of those who have been
brought with thee into torment."

"But do we not die," say the blessed,

"Any other than our first death? and have we escaped the torment?"8

This truly is the great felicity!

For the like of this should the travailers travail!

Is this the better repast or the tree Ez-zakkoum?

Verily, we have made it for a subject of discord to the wicked.

It is a tree which cometh up from the bottom of hell;

Its fruits is as it were the heads of Satans;

And, lo! the damned shall surely eat of it and fill their bellies with it:

Then shall they have, thereon, a mixture of boiling water:

Then shall they return to hell.

They found their fathers erring,

And they hastened on in their footsteps.

Also before them the greater number of the ancients had erred.

Though we had sent warners among them.

But see what was the end of these warned ones,

Except of God's true servants.

Noah called on us of old, and right prompt were we to hear him,9

And we saved him and his family out of the great distress,

And we made his offspring the survivors;

And we left for him with posterity,

"Peace be on Noah throughout the worlds!"

Thus do we reward the well-doers,

For he was one of our believing servants;-

And the rest we drowned.

And truly, of his faith was Abraham,

When he brought to his Lord a perfect heart,

When he said to his father and to his people, "What is this ye worship?

Prefer ye with falsehood gods to God?

And what deem ye of the Lord of the worlds?"

So gazing he gazed towards the stars,

And said, "In sooth I am ill:10

And they turned their back on him and departed.

He went aside to their gods and said, "Do ye not eat?

What aileth you that ye do not speak?"

He broke out upon them, with the right hand striking:

When his tribesmen came back to him with hasty steps

He said, "Worship ye what ye carve,

When God hath created you, and that ye make?"

They said, "Build up a pyre for him and cast him into the glowing flame."

Fain would they plot against him, but we brought them low.

And he said, "Verily, I repair to my Lord who will guide me:

O Lord give me a son, of the righteous."

We announced to him a youth of meekness.

And when he became a full-grown youth,11

His father said to him, "My son, I have seen in a dream that I should
sacrifice thee; therefore, consider what thou seest right."

He said, "My father, do what thou art bidden; of the patient, if

God please, shalt thou find me."

And when they had surrendered them to the will of God, he laid him down upon
his forehead:

We cried unto him, "O Abraham!

Now hast thou satisfied the vision." See how we recompense the righteous.

This was indeed a decisive test.

And we ransomed his son with a costly12 victim,

And we left this13 for him among posterity,

"PEACE BE ON ABRAHAM!"

Thus do we reward the well-doers,

For he was of our believing servants.

And we announced Isaac to him-a righteous Prophet-

And on him and on Isaac we bestowed our blessing. And among their offspring
were well-doers, and others, to their own hurt undoubted sinners.

And of old,14 to Moses and to Aaron shewed we favours:

And both of them, and their people, we rescued from the great distress:

And we succoured them, and they became the conquerors:

And we gave them (Moses and Aaron) each the lucid book:

And we guided them each into the right way:

And we left this for each among posterity,

"PEACE BE ON MOSES AND AARON."

Thus do we reward the well-doers,

For they were two of our believing servants.

And Elias truly was of our Sent Ones,

When he said to his people, "Fear ye not God?

Invoke ye Baal and forsake ye the most skilful Creator?

God is your Lord, and the Lord of your sires of old?"

But they treated him as a liar, and shall therefore be consigned to
punishment,

Except God's faithful servants.

And we left this for him among posterity,

"PEACE BE ON ELIASIN!"15

Thus do we reward the well-doers,

For he was one of our believing servants.

And Lot truly was of our Sent Ones,

When we rescued him and all his family,

Save an aged woman among those who tarried.

Afterward we destroyed the others.

And ye indeed pass by their ruined dwellings at morn

And night: will ye not then reflect?

Jonas, too, was one of the Apostles,

When he fled unto the laden ship,

And lots were cast,16 and he was doomed,

And the fish swallowed him, for he was blameworthy.

But had he not been of those who praise Us,

In its belly had he surely remained, till the day of resurrection.

And we cast him on the bare shore-and he was sick;-

And we caused a gourd-plant to grow up over him,

And we sent him to a hundred thousand persons, or even more,

And because they believed, we continued their enjoyments for a season.

Inquire then of the Meccans whether thy Lord hath daughters, and they, sons?

Have we created the angels females? and did they witness it?

Is it not a falsehood of their own devising, when they say,

"God hath begotten"? They are indeed liars.

Would he have preferred daughters to sons?

What reason have ye for thus judging?

Will ye not then receive this warning?

Have ye a clear proof for them?

Produce your Book if ye speak truth.

And they make him to be of kin with the Djinn: but the Djinn have long known
that these idolaters shall be brought up before God.

Far be the glory of God from what they impute to him.

"His faithful servants do not thus.

Moreover, ye and what ye worship

Shall not stir up any against God,17

Save him who shall burn in Hell.

And verily each one of us hath his appointed place,

And we range ourselves in order,

And we celebrate His praises."18

And if those infidels say,

"Had we a revelation transmitted to us from those of old,19

We had surely been God's faithful servants."

Yet they believe not the Koran. But they shall know its truth at last.

Our word came of old to our servants the apostles,

That they should surely be the succoured,

And that our armies should procure the victory for them.

Turn aside therefore from them for a time,

And behold them, for they too shall in the end behold their doom.

Would they then hasten our vengeance?

But when it shall come down into their courts, an evil morning shall it be to
those who have had their warning.

Turn aside from them therefore for a time.

And behold; for they too shall in the end behold their doom.

Far be the glory of thy Lord, the Lord of all greatness, from what they
impute to him,

And peace be on his Apostles!

And praise be to God the Lord of the worlds.


_______________________

1 I have given in the text the sense of these first two verses according to
the Muhammadan commentators. The original, literally translated, viz. By the
ranks which rank themselves, and by the repellers who repel, would not convey
an intelligible idea to the English reader. Mar. renders, Per ordinantes
ordinando et agitantes agitando.

2 Ar. Easts. Errat in pluralitate mundorum. Mar. But the allusion probably is
to the different points of the horizon at which the sun rises and sets in the
course of the year.

3 See Sura [lvii.] xv. 18.

4 Or, comrades, i.e. the demons.

5 Lit. on the right hand, the side of good omen i.e. with semblance of truth.

6 See Sura [lx.] xxxvi. 6.

7 The ostrich egg carefully protected from dust.

8 Lit. and are we not among the punished?

9 Lit. et sane euge auditores. Mar.

10 And therefore unable to assist at your sacrifices.

11 Lit. cum igitur pervenisset cum eo ad ¬ëtatem cui competit operandi
studium. Mar. Beidh. When he had attained to the age when he could work with
him. Lane.

12 Brought, says Rabbi Jehoshua, from Paradise by an angel. Midr. fol.

13 This salutation.

14 The Arabic particle which is here and elsewhere rendered of old (also,
already, certainly) serves to mark the position of a past act or event as
prior to the time present, and in all such passages merely gives a fulness
and intensity to our perfect, or pluperfect tense.

15 The form of this word is altered in the original for the sake of the
rhyme.

16 Lit. he cast lots (with the sailors).

17 Nequequam vos ad illud colendum estis Seducturi. Mar.

18 This verse and the six preceding are the words of the Angel.

19 Compare verse 69.


SURA LXXI.-NOAH [LI.]

MECCA.-29 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

We sent NOAH to his people, and said to him, "Warn thou thy people ere there
come on them an afflictive punishment."

He said, "O my people! I come to you a plain-spoken warner:

Serve God and fear Him, and obey me:

Your sins will He forgive you, and respite you till the fixed Time; for when
God's fixed Time hath come, it shall not be put back. Would that ye knew
this!"

He said, "Lord I have cried to my people night and day; and my cry doth but
make them flee from me the more.

So oft as I cry to them, that thou mayest forgive them, they thrust their
fingers into their ears, and wrap themselves in their garments, and persist
in their error, and are disdainfully disdainful.

Then I cried aloud to them:

Then again spake I with plainness, and in private did I secretly address
them:

And I said, Beg forgiveness of your Lord, for He is ready to forgive.

He will send down the very Heaven upon you in plenteous rains;

And will increase you in wealth and children; and will give you gardens, and
will give you watercourses:-

What hath come to you that ye hope not for goodness from the hand of God?

For He it is who hath formed you by successive steps.1

See ye not how God hath created the seven heavens one over the other?

And He hath placed therein the moon as a light, and hath placed there the sun
as a torch;

And God hath caused you to spring forth from the earth like a plant;

Hereafter will He turn you back into it again, and will bring you forth anew-

And God hath spread the earth for you like a carpet,

That ye may walk therein along spacious paths."'

Said Noah, "O my Lord! they rebel against me, and they follow those whose
riches and children do but aggravate their ruin."

And they plotted a great plot;

And they said, "Forsake not your Gods; forsake not Wadd nor Sowah,

Nor Yaghuth and Yahuk and Nesr;"

And they caused many to err;2-and thou, too, O Muhammad! shalt be the means
of increasing only error in the wicked-

Because of their sins they were drowned, and made to go into the Fire;

And they found that they had no helper save God.

And Noah said, "Lord, leave not one single family of Infidels on the Earth:

For if thou leave them they will beguile thy servants and will beget only
sinners, infidels.

O my Lord, forgive me, and my parents, and every one who, being a believer,
shall enter my house, and believers men and women: and add to the wicked
nought but perdition."


_______________________

1 See Sura xxii. 5.

2 Or, the idols had seduced many. Thus Kas. Beidh. gives both  interpp.-See
on these idols Freytag's Einleitung, p. 349.


SURA LXXVI.-MAN [LII.]

MECCA.-31 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Doth not a long time pass over MAN, during which he is a thing unremembered?1

We have created man from the union of the sexes that we might prove him; and
hearing, seeing, have we made him:

In a right way have we guided him, be he thankful or ungrateful.

For the Infidels we have got ready chains and collars and flaming fire.

But a wine cup tempered at the camphor fountain2 the just shall quaff:

Fount whence the servants of God shall drink, and guide by channels from
place to place;

They who fulfilled their vows, and feared the day whose woes will spread far
and wide;

Who though longing for it themselves, bestowed their food on the poor and the
orphan and the captive:

"We feed you for the sake of God: we seek from you neither recompense nor
thanks:3

A stern and calamitous day dread we from our Lord."

From the evil therefore of that day hath God delivered them and cast on them
brightness of face and joy:

And hath rewarded their constancy, with Paradise and silken robes:

Reclining therein on bridal couches, nought shall they know of sun or
piercing cold:

Its shades shall be close over them, and low shall its fruits hang down:

And vessels of silver and goblets like flagons shall be borne round among
them:

Flagons of silver whose measure themselves shall mete.

And there shall they be given to drink of the cup tempered with zendjebil
(ginger)

From the fount therein whose name is Selsebil (the softly flowing).

Aye-blooming youths go round among them. When thou lookest at them thou
wouldest deem them scattered pearls;

And when thou seest this, thou wilt see delights and a vast kingdom:

Their clothing green silk robes and rich brocade: with silver bracelets shall
they be adorned; and drink of a pure beverage shall their Lord give them.

This shall be your recompense. Your efforts shall meet with thanks.

We ourselves have sent down to thee the Koran as a missive from on high.

Await then with patience the judgments of thy Lord, and obey not the wicked
among them and the unbelieving:

And make mention of the name of thy Lord at morn, at even,

And at night. Adore him, and praise him the livelong night.

But these men love the fleeting present, and leave behind them the heavy day
of doom.

Ourselves have we created them, and strengthened their joints; and when we
please, with others like unto themselves will we replace them.

This truly is a warning: And whoso willeth, taketh the way to his Lord;

But will it ye shall not, unless God will it, for God is Knowing, Wise.

He causeth whom He will to enter into his mercy. But for the evil doers, He
hath made ready an afflictive chastisement.

_______________________

1 When in the womb.

2 With (the water of) Kafoor. Lane.

3 Desire no recompense from you.


SURA XLIV.-SMOKE [LIII.]

MECCA.-59 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Ha. Mim.1 By this clear Book!

See! on a blessed night2 have we sent it down, for we would warn mankind:

On the night wherein all things are disposed in wisdom,3

By virtue of our behest. Lo! we have ever sent forth Apostles,

A mercy from thy Lord: he truly heareth and knoweth all things-

Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth and of all that is between them,-if ye
be firm in faith-

There is no God but He!-He maketh alive and killeth!-Your Lord and the Lord
of your sires of old!

Yet with doubts do they disport them.

But mark them on the day when the Heaven shall give out a palpable SMOKE,

Which shall enshroud mankind: this will be an afflictive torment.

They will cry, "Our Lord! relieve us from this torment: see! we are
believers."

But how did warning avail them, when an undoubted apostle had come to them;

And they turned their backs on him, and said, "Taught by others, possessed?"

Were we to relieve you from the plague even a little, ye would certainly
relapse.4

On the day when we shall fiercely put forth our great fierceness, we will
surely take vengeance on them!

Of old, before their time, had we proved the people of Pharaoh, when a noble
apostle presented himself to them.

"Send away with me," cried he, "the servants of God; for I am an apostle
worthy of all credit:

And exalt not yourselves against God, for I come to you with undoubted power;

And I take refuge with Him who is my Lord and your Lord, that ye stone me
not:

And if ye believe me not, at least separate yourselves from me."

And he cried to his Lord, "That these are a wicked people."

"March forth then, said God, with my servants by night, for ye will be
pursued.

And leave behind you the cleft sea: they are a drowned host."

How many a garden and fountain did they quit!

And corn fields and noble dwellings!

And pleasures in which they rejoiced them!

So was it: and we gave them as a heritage to another people.

Nor Heaven nor Earth wept for them, nor was their sentence respited;

And we rescued the children of Israel from a degrading affliction-

From Pharaoh, for he was haughty, given to excess.

And we chose them, in our prescience, above all peoples,5

And we shewed them miracles wherein was their clear trial.

Yet these infidels say,

"There is but our first death, neither shall we be raised again:

Bring back our sires, if ye be men of truth."

Are they better than the people of Tobba,6

And those who flourished before them whom we destroyed for their evil deeds?

We have not created the Heavens and the Earth and whatever is between them in
sport:

We have not created them but for a serious end:7 but the greater part of them
understand it not.

Verily the day of severing8 shall be the appointed time of all:

A day when the master shall not at all be aided by the servant, neither shall
they be helped;

Save those on whom God shall have mercy: for He is the mighty, the merciful.

Verily the tree of Ez-Zakkoum9

Shall be the sinner's10 food:

Like dregs of oil shall it boil up in their bellies,

Like the boiling of scalding water.

"-Seize ye him, and drag him into the mid-fire;

Then pour on his head of the tormenting boiling water.

-'Taste this:' for thou forsooth art the mighty, the honourable!

Lo! this is that of which ye doubted."

But the pious shall be in a secure place,

Amid gardens and fountains,

Clothed in silk and richest robes, facing one another:

Thus shall it be: and we will wed them to the virgins with large dark eyes:

Therein shall they call, secure, for every kind of fruit;

Therein, their first death passed, shall they taste death no more; and He
shall keep them from the pains of Hell:-

'Tis the gracious bounty of thy Lord! This is the great felicity.

We have made this Koran easy for thee in thine own tongue, that they may take
the warning.

Therefore wait thou, for they are waiting.11

_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. I, p. 32.

2 Of the 23rd and 24th of Ramadhan, in which, according to the Muslim creed,
all the events of the year subsequent are arranged. See Sura xcvii. n. 2, p.
27.

3 Lit. We settle each wise affair-called wise, because proceeding direct from
the will of Him who is absolute wisdom.

4 Beidh, and others suppose this verse to have been revealed at Medina. This
opinion, however, is based upon the supposition that it refers to the famine
with which Mecca was visited after the Hejira.

5 Comp. Ex. xx. 20; Deut. viii. 16.

6 Tobba, i.e. Chalif or successor, is the title of the Kings of Yemen; or of
Hadramont, Saba, and Hamyar.-See Pocock, Spec. Hist. Ar. p. 60.

7 Lit. in truth.

8 That is, Of the good from the bad.

9 See Sura xxxvii. 60, p. 81.

10 The commentators suppose this sinner to be Abu Jahl, one of the chief of
the Koreisch, and the bitter enemy of Muhammad.

11 To see the turn which events may take.


SURA L.-KAF [LIV.]

MECCA.-45 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

Kaf1. By the glorious Koran:

They marvel forsooth that one of themselves hath come to them charged with
warnings. "This," say the infidels, "is a marvellous thing:

What! when dead and turned to dust shall we. . . .? Far off is such a return
as this?"

Now know we what the earth consumeth of them, and with us is a Book in which
account is kept.

But they have treated the truth which hath come to them as falsehood;
perplexed therefore is their state.

Will they not look up to the heaven above them, and consider how we have
reared it and decked it forth, and that there are no flaws therein?

And as to the earth, we have spread it out, and have thrown the mountains
upon it, and have caused an upgrowth in it of all beauteous kinds of plants,

For insight and admonition to every servant who loveth to turn to God:

And we send down the rain from Heaven with its blessings, by which we cause
gardens to spring forth and the grain of harvest,

And the tall palm trees with date-bearing branches one above the other

For man's nourishment: And life give we thereby to a dead country. So also
shall be the resurrection.

Ere the days of these (Meccans) the people of Noah, and the men of Rass2 and
Themoud, treated their prophets as impostors:

And Ad and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot and the dwellers in the forest,
and the people of Tobba,3 all gave the lie to their prophets: justly,
therefore, were the menaces inflicted.

Are we wearied out with the first creation? Yet are they in doubt with regard
to a new creation!4

We created man: and we know what his soul whispereth to him, and we are
closer to him than his neck-vein.

When the two angels charged with taking account shall take it, one sitting on
the right hand, the other on the left:

Not a word doth he utter, but there is a watcher with him ready to note it
down:

And the stupor of certain death cometh upon him: "This is what thou wouldst
have shunned"-

And there shall be a blast on the trumpet,-it is the threatened day!

And every soul shall come,-an angel with it urging it along, and an angel to
witness against it5-

Saith he, "Of this day didst thou live in heedlessness: but we have taken off
thy veil from thee, and thy sight is becoming sharp this day."

And he who is at this side6 shall say, "This is what I am prepared with
against thee."

And God will say, "Cast into Hell, ye twain, every infidel, every hardened
one,

The hinderer of the good, the transgressor, the doubter,

Who set up other gods with God. Cast ye him into the fierce torment."

He who is at his side shall say, "O our Lord! I led him not astray, yet was
he in an error wide of truth."

He shall say, "Wrangle not in my presence. I had plied you beforehand with
menaces:

My doom changeth not, and I am not unjust to man."

On that day will we cry to Hell, "Art thou full?" And it shall say, "Are
there more?"7

And not far from thence shall Paradise be brought near unto the Pious:

- "This is what ye have been promised: to every one who hath turned in
penitence to God and kept his laws;

Who hath feared the God of Mercy in secret, and come to him with a contrite
heart:

Enter it in peace: this is the day of Eternity."

There shall they have all that they can desire: and our's will it be to
augment their bliss:

And how many generations have we destroyed ere the days of these (Meccans),
mightier than they in strength! Search ye then the land. Is there any escape?

Lo! herein is warning for him who hath a heart, or giveth ear, and is himself
an eye-witness.8

We created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six
days, and no weariness touched us.9

Wherefore put up with what they say, and celebrate the praise of thy Lord
before sunrise and before sunset:

And praise Him in the night: and perform the two final prostrations.

And list for the day whereon the crier shall cry from a place near to every
one alike:

The day on which men shall in truth hear that shout will be the day of their
coming forth from the grave.

Verily, we cause to live, and we cause to die. To us shall all return.

On the day when the earth shall swiftly cleave asunder over the dead, will
this gathering be easy to Us.

We know best what the infidels say: and thou art not to compel them.

Warn then by the Koran those who fear my menace.

_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. I, p. 32.

2 See [lxvi.] xxv. 40.

3 See xliv. 36, p. 90.

4 The Resurrection.

5 Lit. a driver and a witness.

6 The Satan who is chained to him. Sura [lxxi.] xli. 24.

7 Lit. is there any addition? which some explain as if Hell enquired whether,
being already full, any addition could be made to its size. Comp. Prov. xxx.
15, and Othioth Derabbi Akiba, 8, 1: "That the Prince of Hell saith daily,
Give me food enough, is clear from what is said (Is. v. 14). Therefore Shaol
hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure, etc."

8 That is, of the ruins of the destroyed cities, etc.

9 This verse is said (by Omar b. Muhammad, Itq. 36, Djelal Eddin, ap. Maracc.
and Beidh.) to have been revealed in answer to the Jews who told the Prophet
that if God rested on the Sabbath, it was because he was weary. But a
connection with verse 14 seems more natural.


SURA XX.1-TA. HA. [LV.]

MECCA.-135 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

TA. HA.2 Not to sadden thee have we sent down this Koran to thee,

But as a warning for him who feareth;

It is a missive from Him who hath made the earth and the lofty heavens!

The God of Mercy sitteth on his throne:

His, whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, and
whatsoever is between them both, and whatsoever is beneath the humid soil!

Thou needest not raise thy voice:3 for He knoweth the secret whisper, and the
yet more hidden.

God! There is no God but He! Most excellent His titles!

Hath the history of Moses reached thee?

When he saw a fire, and said to his family, "Tarry ye here, for I perceive a
fire:

Haply I may bring you a brand from it, or find at the fire a guide."4

And when he came to it, he was called to, "O Moses!

Verily, I am thy Lord:. therefore pull off thy shoes: for thou art in the
holy valley of Towa.

And I have chosen thee: hearken then to what shall be revealed.

Verily, I am God: there is no God but me: therefore worship me, and observe
prayer for a remembrance of me.

Verily the hour is coming:-I all but manifest it-

That every soul may be recompensed for its labours.

Nor let him who believeth not therein and followeth his lust, turn thee aside
from this truth, and thou perish.

Now, what is that in thy right hand, O Moses?"

Said he, "It is my staff on which I lean, and with which I beast down leaves
for my sheep, and I have other uses for it."

He said, "Cast it down, O Moses!"

So he cast it down, and lo! it became a serpent that ran along.

He said, "Lay hold on it, and fear not: to its former state will we restore
it."

"Now place thy right hand to thy arm-pit: it shall come forth white, but
unhurt:-another sign!-

That We may shew thee the greatest of our signs.

Go to Pharaoh, for he hath burst all bounds."

He said, "O my Lord! enlarge my breast for me,

And make my work easy for me,

And loose the knot of my tongue,5

That they may understand my speech.

And give me a counsellor6 from among my family,

Aaron my brother;

By him gird up my loins,7

And make him a colleague in my work,

That we may praise thee oft and oft remember thee,

For thou regardest us."

He said, "O Moses, thou hast obtained thy suit:

Already, at another time, have we showed thee favour,

When we spake unto thy mother what was spoken:

'Cast him into the ark:8 then cast him on the sea [the river], and the sea
shall throw him on the shore: and an enemy to me and an enemy to him shall
take him up.' And I myself have made thee an object of love,

That thou mightest be reared in mine eye.

When thy sister went and said, 'Shall I shew you one who will nurse him?'9
Then We returned thee to thy mother that her eye might be cheered, and that
she might not grieve. And when thou slewest a person, We delivered thee from
trouble, and We tried thee with other trial.

For years didst thou stay among the people of Midian; then camest thou hither
by my decree, O Moses:

And I have chosen thee for Myself.

Go thou and thy brother with my signs and be not slack to remember me.

Go ye to Pharaoh, for he hath burst all bounds:

But speak ye to him with gentle speech; haply he will reflect or fear."

They said, "O our Lord! truly we fear lest he break forth against us, or act
with exceeding injustice."

He said, "Fear ye not, for I am with you both. I will hearken and I will
behold.

Go ye then to him and say, 'Verily we are Sent ones of thy Lord; send
therefore the children of Israel with us and vex them not: now are we come to
thee with signs from thy Lord, and, Peace shall be on him who followeth the
right guidance.

For now hath it been revealed to us, that chastisement shall be on him who
chargeth with falsehood, and turneth him away."'

And he said, "Who is your Lord, O Moses?"

He said, "Our Lord is He who hath given to everything its form and then
guideth it aright."

"But what," said he, "was the state of generations past?"10

He said, "The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in the Book of his decrees.
My Lord erreth not, nor forgetteth.

He hath spread the earth as a bed, and hath traced out paths for you therein,
and hath sent down rain from Heaven, and by it we bring forth the kinds11 of
various herbs:

-'Eat ye, and feed your cattle.' Of a truth in this are signs unto men endued
with understanding.

From it have we created you, and into it will we return you, and out of it
will we bring you forth a second time."12

And we shewed him all our signs: but he treated them as falsehoods, and
refused to believe.

He said, "Hast thou come, O Moses, to drive us from our land by thine
enchantments?

Therefore will we assuredly confront thee with like enchantments: so appoint
a meeting between us and you-we will not fail it, we, and do not thou-in a
place alike for both."

He said, "On the feast day13 be your meeting, and in broad daylight let the
people be assembled."

And Pharaoh turned away, and collected his craftsmen and came.

Said Moses to them, "Woe to you! devise not a lie against God:

For then will he destroy you by a punishment. They who have lied have ever
perished."

And the magicians discussed their plan, and spake apart in secret:

They said, "These two are surely sorcerers: fain would they drive you from
your land by their sorceries, and lead away in their paths your chiefest men:

So muster your craft: then come in order: well this day shall it be for him,
who shall gain the upper hand."

They said, "O Moses, wilt thou first cast down thy rod, or shall we be the
first who cast?"

He said, "Yes, cast ye down first." And lo! by their enchantment their cords
and rods seemed to him as if they ran.

And Moses conceived a secret fear within him.

We said, "Fear not, for thou shalt be the uppermost:

Cast forth then what is in thy right hand: it shall swallow up what they have
produced: they have only produced the deceit of an enchanter: and come where
he may, ill shall an enchanter fare."

And the magicians fell down and worshipped. They said,

"We believe in the Lord of Aaron and of Moses."

Said Pharaoh, "Believe ye on him ere I give you leave? He, in sooth, is your
Master who hath taught you magic. I will therefore cut off your hands and
your feet on opposite sides, and I will crucify you on trunks of the palm,
and assuredly shall ye learn which of us is severest in punishing, and who is
the more abiding."14

They said, "We will not have more regard to thee than to the clear tokens
which have come to us, or than to Him who hath made us: doom the doom thou
wilt: Thou canst only doom as to this present life: of a truth we have
believed on our Lord that he may pardon us our sins and the sorcery to which
thou hast forced us, for God is better, and more abiding than thou.15

As for him who shall come before his Lord laden with crime-for him verily is
Hell: he shall not die in it and he shall not live.

But he who shall come before Him, a believer, with righteous works,-these!
the loftiest grades await them:

Gardens of Eden, beneath whose trees16 the rivers flow: therein shall they
abide for ever. This, the reward of him who hath been pure."

Then revealed we to Moses, "Go forth by night with my servants and cleave for
them a dry path in the sea;

Fear not thou to be overtaken, neither be thou afraid."

And Pharaoh followed them with his hosts, and the whelming billows of the sea
overwhelmed them,17 for Pharaoh misled his people, and did not guide them.

O children of Israel! we rescued you from your foes; and We appointed a
meeting with you on the right side of the mountain; and We caused the manna
and the quail to descend upon you:

"Eat," said We, "of the good things with which we have supplied you; but
without excess, lest my wrath fall upon you; for on whom my wrath doth fall,
he perisheth outright.

Surely however will I forgive him who turneth to God and believeth, and
worketh righteousness, and then yieldeth to guidance.

But what hath hastened thee on apart from thy people,18 O Moses?"

He said, "They are hard on my footsteps: but to thee, O Lord, have I
hastened, that thou mightest be well pleased with me."

He said, "Of a truth now have we proved thy people since thou didst leave
them, and Samiri19 had led them astray."

And Moses returned to his people, angered, sorrowful.

He said, "O my people! did not your Lord promise you a good promise? Was the
time of my absence long to you? or desired ye that wrath from your Lord
should light upon you, that ye failed in your promise to me?"

They said, "Not of our own accord have we failed in the promise to thee, but
we were made to bring loads of the people's trinkets, and we threw them into
the fire and Samiri likewise cast them in, and brought forth to them a
corporeal lowing20 calf: and they said, "This is your God and the God of
Moses, whom he hath forgotten."'

What! saw they not that it returned them no answer, and could neither hurt
nor help them?

And Aaron had before said to them, "O my people! by this calf are ye only
proved: surely your Lord is the God of Mercy: follow me therefore and obey my
bidding."

They said, "We will not cease devotion to it, till Moses come back to us."

He said, "O Aaron! when thou sawest that they had gone astray, what hindered
thee from following me? Hast thou then disobeyed my command?"

He said, "O Son of my mother! seize me not by my beard, nor by my head:
indeed I feared lest thou shouldst say,

Thou hast rent the children of Isreal asunder, and hast not observed my
orders."'

He said, "And what was thy motive, O Samiri?" He said, "I saw what they saw
not: so I took a handful of dust from the track21 of the messenger of God,
and flung it into the calf, for so my soul prompted me."

He said, "Begone then: verily thy doom even in this life shall be to say,
'Touch me not.'22 And there is a threat against thee, which thou shalt not
escape hereafter. Now look at thy god to which thou hast continued so
devoted: we will surely burn it and reduce it to ashes, which we will cast
into the sea.

Your God is God, beside whom there is no God: In his knowledge he embraceth
all things."

Thus do We recite to thee histories of what passed of old; and from ourself
have we given thee admonition.

Whoso shall turn aside from it shall verily carry a burden on the day of
Resurrection:

Under it shall they remain: and grievous, in the day of Resurrection, shall
it be to them to bear.

On that day there shall be a blast on the trumpet, and We will gather the
wicked together on that day with leaden23 eyes:

They shall say in a low voice, one to another,-"Ye tarried but ten days on
earth."

We are most knowing with respect to that which they will say when the most
veracious24 of them will say. "Ye have not tarried above a day."

And they will ask thee of the mountains: SAY: scattering my Lord will scatter
them in dust;

And he will leave them a level plain: thou shalt see in it no hollows or
jutting hills.

On that day shall men follow their summoner25-he marcheth straight on: and
low shall be their voices before the God of Mercy, nor shalt thou hear aught
but the light footfall.

No intercession shall avail on that day, save his whom the God of Mercy shall
allow to intercede, and whose words he shall approve.

He knoweth their future and their past; but in their own knowledge they
comprehend it not:-

And humble shall be their faces before Him that Liveth, the Self-subsisting:
and undone he, who shall bear the burden of iniquity;

But he who shall have done the things that are right and is a believer, shall
fear neither wrong nor loss.

Thus have We sent down to thee an Arabic Koran, and have set forth menaces
therein diversely, that haply they may fear God, or that it may give birth to
reflection in them.

Exalted then be God, the King, the Truth! Be not hasty in its recital26 while
the revelation of it to thee is incomplete. Say rather, "O my Lord, increase
knowledge unto me."

And of old We made a covenant with Adam; but he forgat it; and we found no
firmness of purpose in him.

And when We said to the angels, "Fall down and worship Adam," they worshipped
all, save Eblis, who refused: and We said, "O Adam! this truly is a foe to
thee and to thy wife. Let him not therefore drive you out of the garden, and
ye become wretched;

For to thee is it granted that thou shalt not hunger therein, neither shalt
thou be naked;

But Satan whispered him: said he, "O Adam! shall I shew thee the tree of
Eternity,27 and the Kingdom that faileth not?"

And they both ate thereof, and their nakedness appeared to them, and they
began to sew of the leaves of the Garden to cover them, and Adam disobeyed
his Lord and went astray.

Afterwards his Lord chose him for himself, and was turned towards him, and
guided him.

And God said, "Get ye all down hence, the one of you a foe unto the other.
Hereafter shall guidance come unto you from me;

And whoso followeth my guidance shall not err, and shall not be wretched:

But whoso turneth away from my monition, his truly shall be a life of misery:

And We will assemble him with others on the day of Resurrection, blind."28

He will say, "O my Lord! why hast thou assembled me with others, blind?
whereas I was endowed with sight."

He will answer, "Thus is it, because our signs came unto thee and thou didst
forget them, and thus shalt thou be forgotten this day."

Even thus will We recompense him who hath transgressed and hath not believed
in the signs of his Lord; and assuredly the chastisement of the next world
will be more severe and more lasting.

Are not they, who walk the very places where they dwelt, aware how many
generations we have destroyed before them? Verily in this are signs to men of
insight.

And had not a decree of respite from thy Lord first gone forth, their
chastisement had at once ensued. Yet the time is fixed.

Put up then with what they say; and celebrate the praise of thy Lord before
the sunrise, and before its setting; and some time in the night do thou
praise him, and in the extremes29 of the day, that thou haply mayest please
Him.

And strain not thine eye after what We have bestowed on divers of them-the
braveries of this world-that we may thereby prove them. The portion which thy
Lord will give, is better and more lasting.

Enjoin prayer on thy family, and persevere therein. We ask not of thee to
find thine own provision-we will provide for thee, and a happy issue shall
there be to piety.

But they say, "If he come not to us with a sign from his Lord . . .!"30 But
have not clear proofs for the Koran come to them, in what is in the Books of
old?

And had We destroyed them by a chastisement before its time, they would
surely have said, "O our Lord! How could we believe if thou didst not send
unto us an Apostle that we might follow thy signs ere that we were humbled
and disgraced."

SAY: Each one of us awaiteth the end. Wait ye then, and ye shall know which
of us have been followers of the even way, and who hath been the rightly
guided.


_______________________

1 The first 14 or 16 verses of this Sura are said to have induced Omar to
embrace Islam (His. 226. Ibn S√¢d, i. and v. Comp. Weil, p. 60. Causs. i. 396
ff.) in the sixth year before the Hejira.

2 Freytag supposes these letters to mean, Hush! but see Sura lxviii. 1, p.
32.

3 Lit. if thou raise thy voice.

4 Lit. guidance. Moses had lost his way, say the Commentators, when
journeying to Egypt to visit his mother.

5 The Muhammadan Commentators tell how Moses when a child burnt his tongue
with a live coal. The same story is found in Midr. Jalkut on Ex. c. 166, and
in Shalsheleth Hakabalah, p. 5, b. Ed. Amsterd.

6 Lit vizir.

7 Or, strengthen my back.

8 The form of the word in the original is not the pure Hebraic, but the later
Rabbinic form.

9 See Sura [lxxix.] xxviii. 11, 12.

10 What is their condition after their death as to happiness or misery.
Beidh. whom Sale follows. But the word state, which Mar. renders mens, refers
rather to their creed. "How," enquires Pharaoh, "do you explain the fact that
the generations of men have always practised a different worship?"

11 Lit. pairs.

12 The Midrasch Tanchumah on Ex. vii. gives a very similar dialogue between
Pharaoh and Moses.

13 Lit. the day of ornament.

14 In punishing. Beidh.

15 To recompense. Beidh.

16 As the garden is said in Sura lxxxviii. to be lofty in point of situation,
this frequently recurring phrase may mean that rivers run at its base. The
Commentators, however, generally understand it to imply that the rivers flow
beneath its shades or pavilions.

17 Lit. and there overwhelmed them of the sea that which overwhelmed them.

18 The 70 elders who were to have accompanied him.

19 That is, the Samaritan. This rendering, which is probably the true
explanation of the word Samiri, involves a grievous ignorance of history on
the part of Muhammad. Selden (de diis Syr. Syn. i. ch. 4) supposes that
Samiri is Aaron himself, the Shomeer, or keeper of Israel during the absence
of Moses. Many Arabians identify him with the Micha of Judges xvii. who is
said to have assisted in making the calf (Raschi, Sanhedr. 102, 2 Hottinger
Hist. Orient. p. 84). Geiger suggests that Samiri may be a corruption of
Samael. See next note. But it is probable that the name and its application
in the present instance, is to be traced to the old national feud between the
Jews and Samaritans. See De Sacy, Chrestom. i. p. 189, who quotes Abu Rihan
Muhammad as stating that the Samaritans were called Al-limsahsit, the people
who say, "Touch me not" (v. 97, below), and Juynboll Chron. Sam. (Leid. 1848)
p. 113. Sale also mentions a similar circumstance of a tribe of Samaritan
Jews dwelling on one of the islands in the Red Sea.

20 "The calf came forth (Ex. xxxii. 24) lowing and the Israelites beheld it.
R. Jehuda saith, Samuel entered into it and lowed in order to mislead
Israel." Pirke R. Eliezer, ¬ß 45.

21 From the track of Gabriel's horse, or of Gabriel himself.

22 Lit. no touch.

23 I have adopted the word leaden as expressive of the idea implied in the
original word, viz. grey or greyish blue; hence, dulled, dimmed. The Arabians
have a great aversion to blue and grey eyes as characteristic of their
enemies the Greeks. The word, however, may also mean blind. Comp. v. 124, 5.

24 Lit. the most excellent or just of them in his way: dignitate, Mar. But
Kam. in Freyt. (iii. 150) justissimus eorum, simillimus veracibus. The sense
of the last clause is, "Yes have not tarried even so much as ten days, such,
now that we look back upon it, is the brevity of life." See Sura [lxiv.]
xxiii. 115.

25 The angel Israfil.

26 Compare Sura lxxv. 16-19, p. 56.

27 It should be observed that here and in Sura vii. 19, Muhammad seems
unaware of the distinction between the tree of knowledge, and the tree of
life, as given in Gen. ii. 9, and iii. 5.

28 From the intensity of the light, mentioned Sura [1xxx.] xxxix. 69.

29 In order to reconcile this passage with the prescribed hours, some
understand the extremes to mean the mid-day, when the day is as it were
divided.

30 Supply, we will not believe.


SURA XXVI.-THE POETS1 [LVI.]

MECCA.-228 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Ta. Sin. Mim.2 These are the signs of the lucid Book.

Haply thou wearest thyself away with grief because they will not believe.

Were it our will we could send down to them a sign from Heaven, before which
they would humbly bow.3

But from each fresh warning that cometh to them from the God of Mercy they
have only turned aside,

And treated it as a lie: But tidings shall reach them which they shall not
laugh to scorn.

Have they not beheld the earth-how we have caused every kind of noble plant
to spring up therein?

Verily, in this is a sign: but most of them believe not.

And assuredly, thy Lord!-He is the Mighty, the Merciful.

And remember when thy Lord called to Moses, "Go to the wicked people,

The people of Pharaoh. What! will they not fear me?"

He said, "My Lord, in sooth I fear lest they treat me as a liar:

And my breast is straitened, and I am slow of speech:4 send therefore to
Aaron to be my helpmate.

For they have a charge5 against me, and I fear lest they put me to death."

He said, "Surely not. Go ye therefore with our signs: we will be with you and
will hearken.

And go to Pharaoh and say: 'Verily we are the messengers of the Lord of the
worlds-

Send forth with us the children of Israel."'

He said, "Did we not rear thee among us when a child? And hast thou not
passed years of thy life among us?

And yet what a deed is that which thou hast done!6 Thou art one of the
ungrateful."

He said, "I did it indeed, and I was one of those who erred: And I fled from
you because I feared you; but my Lord hath given me wisdom and hath made me
one of his Apostles.

And is this the favour thou hast conferred on me, that thou hast enslaved the
children of Israel?"

Said Pharaoh, "Who then is the Lord of the Worlds?"

He said, "The Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth and of all that is between
them, if only ye believe it."

Said Pharaoh to those around him, "Hear ye this?"

"Your Lord," said Moses, "and the Lord of your sires of old."

"In sooth, your Apostle whom He hath sent to you," said Pharaoh, "is
certainly possessed."

He said, "Lord is He of the East and of the West, and of all that is between
them, if ye can understand."

He said, "If ye take any God beside me, I will surely put thee in ward."

Said Moses, "What! if I shew thee that which shall be a proof of my mission?"

He said, "Forth with it then, if thou speakest truth."

Then threw he down his staff, and lo! an undoubted serpent:

And he drew out his hand, and lo! it was white7 to the beholders.

He said to his nobles around him. "This truly is a right cunning sorcerer:

Fain would he drive you out of your land by his Sorcery. But what do ye
suggest?"

They said, "Put him and his brother off awhile, and send summoners to all the
cities,

Who shall bring to thee every cunning magician."

So the magicians were mustered at a set time, on a solemn day:

And it was said to the people, "Are ye all assembled?"

-"Yes! and we will follow the magicians if they gain the day."

And when the magicians were arrived they said to Pharaoh, "Shall we have a
reward if we gain the day?"

He said, "Yes. And verily in that case ye shall be of those who are near my
person."

Moses said to them, "Throw down what ye have to throw."

So they cast down their ropes and rods, and said, "By Pharaoh's might we
shall surely win."

Then Moses threw down his rod, and lo! it swallowed up their cheating
wonders.

Then the magicians threw themselves down in worship:

They said, "We believe on the Lord of the Worlds,

The Lord of Moses and of Aaron."

Said Pharaoh, "Have ye then believed on him ere I gave you leave? He truly is
your master who hath taught you magic.8 But bye and bye ye shall surely know
my power.

I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will have you all
crucified."

They said, "It cannot harm us, for to our Lord shall we return:

Assuredly we trust that our Lord will forgive us our sins, since we are of
the first who believe."

Then revealed we this order to Moses: "Go forth by night with my servants,
for ye will be pursued."

And Pharaoh sent summoners through the cities:-

"These Israelites," said they, "are a scanty band;

Yet are they enraged against us-

But we truly are numerous, wary."

Thus we caused them to quit gardens and fountains,

And treasures and splendid dwellings;

So was it; and we gave them to the children of Israel for an heritage.9

Then at sunrise the Egyptians followed them:

And when the hosts came in view of one another, the comrades of Moses said,
"We are surely overtaken."

He said, "By no means:-for my Lord is with me-He will guide me."

And we revealed this order to Moses, "Strike the sea with thy rod." And it
clave asunder, and each part became like a huge mountain.

Then made we the others to draw on;

And we saved Moses, and those who were with him, all;

But we drowned the others.

Truly in this was a sign; but most of them did not believe.

But verily thy Lord,-He is the Mighty, the Merciful!

And recite to them the story of Abraham

When he said to his Father and to his people, "What worship ye?"

They said, "We worship idols, and constant is our devotion to them."

He said, "Can they hear you when ye cry to them?

Or help you or do you harm?"

They said, "But we found our Fathers do the like."

He said, "How think ye? They whom ye worship,

Ye and your fathers of early days,

Are my foes: but not so10 the Lord of the Worlds,

Who hath created me, and guideth me,

Who giveth me food and drink;

And when I am sick, he healeth me,

And who will cause me to die and again quicken me,

And who, I hope, will forgive me my sins in the day of reckoning.

My Lord! bestow on me wisdom and join me to the just,

And give me a good name11 among posterity,

And make me one of the heirs of the garden of delight,

And forgive my father, for he was one of the erring,

And put me not to shame on the day when mankind shall be raised up,

The day when neither wealth nor children shall avail,

Save to him who shall come to God with a sound heart:

When Paradise shall be brought near the pious,

And Hell shall lay open for those who have gone astray.

And it shall be said to them, 'Where are they whom ye worshipped

Beside God? Can they harm you or help themselves?'

And they shall be cast into it-the seducers and the seduced,

And all the host of Eblis.

They shall say, as they wrangle therein together,

'By God, we were in a plain error,

When we equalled you with the Lord of the Worlds:

And none misled us but the wicked,

And we have none to plead for us,

Nor friend who careth for us.

Could we but return, we would be of the believers."'

Verily, in this was a sign: but most of them believed not.

And truly thy Lord!-He is the Mighty, the Merciful!

The people of Noah gainsaid the Apostles,

When their brother Noah said to them, "Will ye not fear God?

Of a truth am I your faithful Apostle;

Fear God then and obey me.

I ask of you no reward for this, for my reward is of the Lord of the Worlds
alone:

Fear God then and obey me."

They said, "Shall we believe on thee when the meanest only are thy
followers?"

He said, "But I have no knowledge of that they did:12

To my Lord only must their account be given: would that ye understood this!

And I will not thrust away those who believe,

For I am only one charged with plain warnings."

They said, "Now unless thou desist, O Noah, one of the stoned shalt thou
surely be."

He said, "Lord! my people treat me as a liar:

Decide thou therefore a decision between me and them, and rescue me and the
faithful who are with me."

So we saved him and those who were with him in the fully-laden ark,

And afterwards we drowned the rest.

Herein truly was a sign, but most of them believed not.

But thy Lord!-He is the Mighty, the Merciful.

The Adites13 treated their Apostles as liars,

When their brother Houd said to them, "Will ye not fear God?

I am your Apostle, worthy of all credit;

Fear God then and obey me:

I ask for no reward for this; for my reward is of the Lord of the Worlds
alone.

What! build ye landmarks on all heights in mere pastime?

And raise ye structures to be your lasting abodes?14

And when ye put forth your power do ye put it forth with harshness?

Fear ye God then and obey me;

And fear ye Him who hath plenteously betowed on you ye well know what:

Plenteously bestowed on you flocks and children,

And gardens and fountains;

Indeed I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day."

They said, "It is the same to us whether thou warn or warn us not.

This is but a tale of the ancients,

And we are not they who shall be punished."

And they charged him with imposture; and we destroyed them. In this was a
sign: but most of them believed not.

But thy Lord!-He is the Mighty, the Merciful!

The Themoudites also treated their Apostles as liars,

When their brother Saleh said to them, "Will ye not fear God?

I am your Apostle worthy of all credit:

Fear God, then, and obey me.

I ask of you no reward for this: my reward is of the Lord of the Worlds
alone.

Shall ye be left secure amid these things here?

Amid gardens and fountains,

And corn-fields and palm-trees, with flower-sheathing branches?

And, insolent that ye are, will ye hew out your dwellings in the mountains?

But fear God and obey me,

And obey not the bidding of those who commit excess,

Who act disorderly on the earth and reform it not."

They said, "Certainly thou art a person bewitched;

Thou art only a man like us: produce now a sign if thou art a man of truth."

He said, "This she-camel, then-drink shall there be for her, and drink shall
there be for you, on a several day for each.

But harm her not, lest the punishment of a tremendous day overtake you."

But they ham-strung her, and repented of it on the morrow;

For the punishment overtook them. In this truly was a sign, but most of them
believed not.

But thy Lord!-He is the Powerful, the Merciful!

The people of Lot treated their apostles as liars,

When their brother Lot said to them, "Will ye not fear God?

I am your Apostle worthy of all credit:

Fear God, then, and obey me.

For this I ask you no reward: my reward is of the Lord of the worlds alone.

What! with men, of all creatures, will ye have commerce?

And leave ye your wives whom your Lord hath created for you? Ah! ye are an
erring people!"

They said, "O Lot, if thou desist not, one of the banished shalt thou surely
be."

He said, "I utterly abhor your doings:

My Lord! deliver me and my family from what they do."

So we delivered him and his whole family-

Save an aged one among those who tarried-

Then we destroyed the rest-

And we rained a rain upon them, and fatal was the rain to those whom we had
warned.

In this truly was a sign; but most of them did not believe.

But thy Lord! He is the Powerful, the Merciful!

The dwellers in the forest of Madian15 treated the Apostles as liars.

When Shoaib their brother said to them, "Will ye not fear God?

I truly am your trustworthy Apostle.

Fear God, then, and obey me:

No reward ask I of you for this: my reward is of the Lord of the Worlds
alone.

Fill the measure, and be not of those who minish:

Weigh with exact balance:

And defraud not men in their substance, and do no wrong on the earth by deeds
of licence;

And fear Him who made you and the races of old."

They said, "Certainly thou art a person bewitched.

Thou art but a man like us, and we deem thee liar-

Make now a part of the heaven to fall down upon us, if thou art a man of
truth."

He said, "My Lord best knoweth your doings."

And when they treated him as a liar, the chastisement of the day of cloud
overtook them. This truly was the chastisement of a dreadful day!

In this was a sign, but most of them believed not.

But thy Lord!-He is the Mighty, the Merciful!

Verily from the Lord of the Worlds hath this Book come down;

The faithful spirit16 hath come down with it

Upon thy heart, that thou mightest become a warner-

In the clear Arabic tongue:

And truly it is foretold in the Scriptures of them of yore.17

Was it not a sign to them18 that the learned among the children of Israel
recognised it?

If we had sent it down unto any foreigner,

And he had recited it to them, they had not believed.

In such sort have we influenced19 the heart of the wicked ones,

That they will not believe it till they see the grievous chastisement?

And it shall come upon them on a sudden when they look not for it:

And they will say, "Can we be respited?"

What! will they seek to hasten on our chastisement?

How thinkest thou? If after we have given them their fill for years,

That with which they are menaced come upon them at last,

Of what avail will their enjoyments be to them?

We never destroyed a city which had not first its warners

With admonition; nor did we deal unjustly.

The Satans were not sent down with this Koran:

It beseemed them not, and they had not the power,

For they are far removed from hearing it.20

Call not thou on any other god but God, lest thou be of those consigned to
torment:

But warn thy relatives of nearer kin,21

And kindly lower thy wing over the faithful who follow thee.

And if they disobey thee, then say: "I will not be answerable for your
doings;"-

And put thy trust in Him that is the Mighty, the Merciful,

Who seeth thee when thou standest in prayer,

And thy demeanour amongst those who worship;

For He heareth, knoweth all.

Shall I tell you on whom Satan descend?

They descend on every lying, wicked person:

They impart what they have heard;22-but most of them are liars.

It is the POETS23 whom the erring follow:

Seest thou not how they rove distraught in every valley?

And that they say that which they do not?

Save those who believe and do good works, and oft remember God;

And who defend themselves when unjustly treated. But they who treat them
unjustly shall find out what a lot awaiteth them.


_______________________

1 This Sura belongs to about the seventh year of Muhammad's prophetic life.

2 See Sura 1xviii. I, p. 32.

3 Lit. to which their necks would humble themselves.

4 Lit. my tongue is not free. This verse appears to be a studied
simplification of Ex. iv. 10-13.

5 The murder of the Egyptian. See Geiger, 159.

6 Lit. and thou hast done thy deed which thou hast done. See xxviii. 15.

7 Thus Pirke R. Elieser ¬ß 48. "He placed his hand in his bosom, and drew it
forth, white as snow with leprosy."

8 "The Pharaoh who lived in the days of Moses was a great magician." Mid.
Jalkut, c. 182. Comp. Sura xxviii. 38, where, in accordance with the Rabbinic
traditions Pharaoh claims to be a God.

9 See ii. 58, and Midr. Jalkut on Ex. xii. c. 208.

10 Lit. except.

11 Lit. a tongue of truth, i.e. high repute. Or, grant that my words may be
believed among posterity. See [lviii.] xix. 47.

12 Of their motives in embracing Islam.

13 The Adites are mentioned in vii. and xi.

14 This is to be understood of the small forts erected by the nomades of the
Hejaz along the route of the caravans to guarantee their safety. Comp. Gen.
xi. 1-10, and Sura lxxxix. 6, p. 54.

15 The Madian and the El-Aika of other Suras are unquestionably one and the
same place, as they have the same prophet Shoaib (or Sho'eyb), the Jethro of
Scripture-a name perhaps altered from Hobab (Numb. x. 29)-and because the
same sin is laid to the charge of both. See Winer's Realw¬îrterbuch on Jethro.
The Midr. Rabbah on Ex. ii. I6, Par. I, makes Jethro renounce idolatry, and
his office of Priest, and undergo banishment from the Midianites.

16 Gabriel. See Sura lxxxi. 19, p. 46.

17 See Sura xiii. 36. This verse is said to have been revealed at Medina by
Itq. 34.

18 The unbelieving Meccans. Lit. that the knowing (Doctors, Uhlemas) knew it.

19 Lit. have introduced it, i.e. infidelity; or, the Koran. Beidh. The latter
interpretation seems most accordant with the context.

20 Comp. Sura xxxvii. 7, 8, p. 79.

21 It is probable that within three or four years from his entry upon the
prophetic office, Muhammad had made about 40 converts. Some biographers refer
to this passage, and not to Sura lxiv. I, as the first call to preach. But
this Sura is itself late, and bears evidence of the opposition to which the
prophet had become exposed, and of adherents to his cause, now become
numerous. The diffuseness and feeblenss of the style clearly point to a late
origin.

22 They impart to their votaries on earth what they have learned by stealth
and partially, in heaven.

23 Muhammad found it necessary to employ the pens of certain poets to defend
himself and his religion from the ridicule and satire of other poets, whose
productions were recited at the great annual fair held at Okatz, the Olympus
of the Hejaz. The poems which were judged the best were written up in letters
of gold, or suspended (hence called Moallakat) in the Caaba. These poetical
contests were subsequently suppressed by Muhammad, as offering openings for
discussions which might prove inconvenient, and dangerous to his rising
claims.


SURA XV.-HEDJR1 [LVII.]

MECCA.-99 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. RA.2 These are the signs of the Book, and of a lucid recital
[Koran].

Many a time will the infidels wish that they had been Muslims.

Let them feast and enjoy themselves, and let hope beguile them: but they
shall know the truth at last.

We never destroyed a city whose term was not perfixed:3

No people can forestall or retard its destiny.

They say: "O thou to whom the warning hath been sent down, thou art surely
possessed by a djinn:

Wouldst thou not have come to us with the angels, if thou wert of those who
assert the truth?"

-We will not send down the angels without due cause.4 The Infidels would not
in that case have been respited.

Verily, We have sent down the warning, and verily, We will be its guardian;

And already have We sent Apostles, before thee, among the sects of the
ancients;

But never came Apostles to them whom they did not deride.

In like manner will We put it into the hearts of the sinners of Mecca to do
the same:

They will not believe on him though the example of those of old hath gone
before.

Even were We to open above them a gate in Heaven, yet all the while they were
mounting up to it,

They would surely say: It is only that our eyes are drunken: nay, we are a
people enchanted.

We have set the signs of the zodiac5 in the Heavens, and adorned and decked
them forth for the beholders,

And We guard them from every stoned6 Satan,

Save such as steal a hearing:7 and him doth a visible flame pursue.

And the Earth have We spread forth, and thrown thereon the mountains, and
caused everything to spring forth in it in balanced measure:

And We have provided therein sustenance for you, and for the creatures which
not ye sustain:

And no one thing is there, but with Us are its storehouses; and We send it
not down but in settled measure:

And We send forth the fertilising winds, and cause the rain to come down from
the heaven, and give you to drink of it; and it is not ye who are its
storers:

And We cause to live and We cause to die,8 and We are the heir of all things:

We know those of you who flourish first and We know those who come later:

And truly thy Lord will gather them together again, for He is Wise, Knowing.

We created man of dried clay, of dark loam moulded;

And the djinn had We before created of subtle fire.

Remember when thy Lord said to the Angels, "I create man of dried clay, of
dark loam moulded:

And when I shall have fashioned him and breathed of my spirit into him, then
fall ye down and worship him."

And the Angels bowed down in worship, all of them, all together,

Save Eblis: he refused to be with those who bowed in worship.

"O Eblis,"9 said God, "wherefore art thou not with those who bow down in
worship?"

He said, "It beseemeth not me to bow in worship to man whom thou hast created
of clay, of moulded loam."

He said, "Begone then hence; thou art a stoned one,10

And the curse shall be on thee till the day of reckoning."

He said, "O my Lord! respite me till the day when man shall be raised from
the dead."

He said, "One then of the respited shalt thou be

Till the day of the predestined time."

He said, "O my Lord! because thou hast beguiled me, I will surely make all
fair seeming to them11 on the earth; I will surely beguile them all;

Except such of them as shall be thy sincere servants."

He said, "This is the right way with me;

For over none of my servants shalt thou have power, save those beguiled ones
who shall follow thee."

And verily, Hell is the promise for them one and all.

It hath seven Portals;12 at each Portal is a separate band of them;

But 'mid gardens and fountains shall the pious dwell:

"Enter ye therein in peace, secure-"

And all rancour will We remove from their bosoms: they shall sit as brethren,
face to face, on couches:

Therein no weariness shall reach them, nor forth from it shall they be cast
for ever.

Announce to my servants that I am the Gracious, the Merciful,

And that my chastisement is the grievous chastisement.

And tell them of Abraham's guests.

When they entered in unto him, and said, "Peace."

"Verily," said he, "We fear you."

They said, "Fear not, for of a sage son we bring thee tidings."

He said, "Bring ye me such tidings now that old age hath come upon me? What,
therefore, are your tidings really?"

They said, "We announce them to thee in very truth. Be not then one of the
despairing."

"And who," said he, "despaireth of the mercy of his Lord, but they who err?"

He said, "What is your business then, O ye Sent Ones?"

They said, "We are sent unto a people who are sinners,

Except the family of Lot, whom verily we will rescue all,

Except his wife. We have decreed that she shall be of those who linger."

And when the Sent Ones came to the family of Lot

He said, "Yes; are persons unknown to me."

They said, "Yes; but we have come to thee for a purpose about which thy
people doubt:

We have come to thee with very truth, and we are truthful envoys.

Lead forth therefore thy family in the dead of the night; follow thou on
their rear: and let no one of you turn round, but pass ye on whither ye are
bidden."

And this command we gave him because to the last man should these people be
cut off at morning.

Then came the people of the city rejoicing at the news13-

He said, "These are my guests: therefore disgrace me not.

And fear God and put me not to shame."

They said, "Have we not forbidden thee to entertain any one whatever?"14

He said, "Here are my daughters, if ye will thus act."

As thou livest, O Muhammad, they were bewildered in the drunkenness of their
lust.

So a tempest overtook them at their sunrise,

And we turned the city upside down, and we rained stones of baked clay upon
them.

Verily, in this are signs for those who scan heedfully;

And these cities lay on the high road.15

Verily, in this are signs for the faithful.

The inhabitants also of El Aika16 were sinners:

So we took vengeance on them, and they both became a plain example.

And the people of HEDJR treated God's messengers as liars.

And we brought forth our signs to them, but they drew back from them:

And they hewed them out abodes in the mountains to secure them:

But a tempest surprised them at early morn,

And their labours availed them nothing.

We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that between them is,
but for a worthy end.17 And verily, "the hour" shall surely come. Wherefore
do thou, Muhammad, forgive with kindly forgiveness,

For thy Lord! He is the Creator, the Wise.

We have already given thee the seven verses of repetition18 and the glorious
Koran.

Strain not thine eyes after the good things we have bestowed on some of the
unbelievers: afflict not thyself on their account, and lower thy wing to the
faithful.19

And SAY: I am the only plain-spoken warner.

We will punish those who foster divisions,20

Who break up the Koran into parts:

By thy Lord! we will surely take account from them one and all,

Concerning that which they have done.

Profess publicly then what thou hast been bidden,21 and withdraw from those
who join gods to God.

Verily, We will maintain thy cause against those who deride thee,

Who set up gods with God: and at last shall they know their folly.

Now know We that thy heart is distressed22 at what they say:

But do thou celebrate the praise of thy Lord, and be of those who bow down in
worship;

And serve thy Lord till the certainty23 o'ertake thee.


_______________________

1 Hedjr, a valley in the route between Medina and Syria, originally the
country of the Themoudites.

2 See Sura lxviii. p. 32.

3 Lit. which had not a known writing.

4 That is, not merely to gratify the curiosity of the doubting, but to
execute prompt punishment. It might also be rendered, save with justice

5 Ar. bourdj, Gr. [greek text], towers, i.e. Signs of the Zodiac.

6 See Sura xv. 34; and note p. 114.

7 Comp. Sura xxxvii. 6, p. 79. In Chagiga 16, 1, the Demons (schedim) are
said to learn the secrets of the future by listening behind the veil
(parg√¥d).

8 Compare precisely a similar association of subjects, the Rain, Food, God,
as Lord of life and death in Tr. Taanith, fol. 1 a.

9 Comp. Sura [xci.] ii. 32. There is much in this dialogue between Eblis and
Allah which reminds of the dialogue between Jehovah and Satan in the opening
of the Book of Job.

10 That is, accursed. According to the Muhammadan tradition, Abraham drove
Satan away with stones when he would have hindered him from sacrificing
Ismael. Hence the custom during the pilgrimage of throwing a certain number
of stones-the Shafeis, 49; the Hanafis, 70-as if at Satan, in the valley of
Mina, near Mecca. The spot where the apparition of Satan to Abraham took
place is marked by three small pillars, at which the stones are now thrown.
Comp. Gen. xv. II.

11 Lit. I will embellish, prepare.

12 Thus, in Sota, 10, David is said to have rescued Absalom from "the seven
dwellings of Hell;" in Midr. on Ps. xi. "There are seven houses of abode for
the wicked in Hell;" and in Sohar ii. 150, "Hell hath seven gates."

13 At the arrival of strangers.

14 Comp. Midr. Rabbah on Gen. Par. 50.

15 From Arabia to Syria. The pronoun in the fem. sing. may refer to the
Pentapolis as to a single city, or to Sodom alone.

16 See Sura [lvi.] xxvi. 176.

17 See Sura [lxxiii.] xvi. 3.

18 That is, the seven verses of Sura 1, p. 28. Others understand, the seven
long Suras; or, the fifteen Suras which make a seventh of the whole; or, this
Sura (Hedjr) as originally the seventh. Mathani is an allusion, according to
some, to the frequency with which the fatthah is to be repeated; or, to the
frequent repetitions of great truths, etc., in order to impress them on the
memory of the hearer and reader; or, to the manner in which waid and wa'd,
promises and threatenings, alternate and balance each other in the same or
subsequent verses and Suras, in pairs. This verse and Sura x. 10 shew that a
part at least of the Koran was known under that name and existed as a whole
in the time of Muhammad. Geiger's interpretations at pp. 59, 60 (and in the
note) seem very forced.

19 Comp. Sura [lvi.] xxvi. 215, i.e. demean thyself gently.

20 Lit. as we sent down upon the dividers, i.e. the Jews and Christians, who
receive part of the Scriptures and reject part. Others render obstructors and
explain the passage of twelve idolaters, who in order to intimidate the
Meccans, seized upon the public revenues of Mecca during the pilgrimage.

21 In this, the fourth year of his mission, Muhammad is said to have hazarded
the step of mounting the Safa, a slight eminence in one of the streets of
Mecca, and publicly preached to the Koreisch. The authorities are given in
Sprenger (Life of M. p. 177, 8).

22 Lit. contracted.

23 Death.


SURA XIX.1-MARY [LVIII.]

MECCA.-98 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

KAF. HA. YA. AIN. SAD.2 A recital of thy Lord's mercy to his servant
Zachariah;

When he called upon his Lord with secret calling,

And said: "O Lord, verily my bones are weakened, and the hoar hairs glisten
on my head,

And never, Lord, have I prayed to thee with ill success.

But now I have fears for my kindred after me;3 and my wife is barren:

Give me, then, a successor as thy special gift, who shall be my heir and an
heir of the family of Jacob: and make him, Lord, well pleasing to thee."

-"O Zachariah! verily we announce to thee a son,-his name John:

That name We have given to none before him."4

He said: "O my Lord! how when my wife is barren shall I have a son, and when
I have now reached old age, failing in my powers?"

He said: So shall it be. Thy Lord hath said, Easy is this to me, for I
created thee aforetime when thou wast nothing."

He said: "Vouchsafe me, O my Lord! a sign." He said: "Thy sign shall be that
for three nights, though sound in health, thou speakest not to man."

And he came forth from the sanctuary to his people, and made signs to them to
sing praises morn and even.

We said: "O John! receive the Book with purpose of heart:"5-and We bestowed
on him wisdom while yet a child;

And mercifulness from Ourself, and purity; and pious was he, and duteous to
his parents; and not proud, rebellious.

And peace was on him on the day he was born, and the day of his death, and
shall be on the day when he shall be raised to life!

And make mention in the Book, of Mary, when she went apart from her family,
eastward,6

And took a veil to shroud herself from them:7 and we sent our spirit8 to her,
and he took before her the form of a perfect man.9

She said: "I fly for refuge from thee to the God of Mercy! If thou fearest
Him, begone from me."

He said: "I am only a messenger of thy Lord, that I may bestow on thee a holy
son."

She said: "How shall I have a son, when man hath never touched me? and I am
not unchaste."

He said: "So shall it be. Thy Lord hath said: 'Easy is this with me;' and we
will make him a sign to mankind, and a mercy from us. For it is a thing
decreed."

And she conceived him,10 and retired with him to a far-off place.

And the throes came upon her11 by the trunk of a palm. She said: "Oh, would
that I had died ere this, and been a thing forgotten, forgotten quite!"

And one cried to her from below her:12 "Grieve not thou, thy Lord hath
provided a streamlet at thy feet:-

And shake the trunk of the palm-tree toward thee:13 it will drop fresh ripe
dates upon thee.

Eat then and drink, and be of cheerful eye:14 and shouldst thou see a man,

Say,-Verily, I have vowed abstinence to the God of mercy.-To no one will I
speak this day."

Then came she with the babe to her people, bearing him. They said, "O Mary!
now hast thou done a strange thing!

O sister of Aaron!15 Thy father was not a man of wickedness, nor unchaste thy
mother."

And she made a sign to them, pointing towards the babe. They said, "How shall
we speak with him who is in the cradle, an infant?"

It said,16 "Verily, I am the servant of God; He hath given me the Book, and
He hath made me a prophet;

And He hath made me blessed wherever I may be, and hath enjoined me prayer
and almsgiving so long as I shall live;

And to be duteous to her that bare me: and he hath not made me proud,
depraved.

And the peace of God was on me the day I was born, and will be the day I
shall die, and the day I shall be raised to life."

This is Jesus, the son of Mary; this is a statement of the truth concerning
which they doubt.

It beseemeth not God to beget a son. Glory be to Him! when he decreeth a
thing, He only saith to it, Be, and it Is.17

And verily, God is my Lord and your Lord; adore Him then. This is the right
way.

But the Sects have fallen to variance among themselves about Jesus: but woe,
because of the assembly of a great day, to those who believe not!

Make them hear, make them behold the day when they shall come before us! But
the offenders this day are in a manifest error.

Warn them of the day of sighing when the decree shall be accomplished, while
they are sunk in heedlessness and while they believe not.

Verily, we will inherit the earth and all who are upon it. To us shall they
be brought back.

Make mention also in the Book of Abraham; for he was a man of truth, a
Prophet.18

When he said to his Father, "O my Father! why dost thou worship that which
neither seeth nor heareth, nor profiteth thee aught?

O my Father! verily now hath knowledge come to me which hath not come to
thee. Follow me therefore-I will guide thee into an even path.

O my Father! worship not Satan, for Satan is a rebel against the God of
Mercy.

O my Father! indeed I fear lest a chastisement from the God of Mercy light
upon thee, and thou become Satan's vassal."

He said, "Castest thou off my Gods, O Abraham? If thou forbear not, I will
surely stone thee. Begone from me for a length of time."

He said, "Peace be on thee! I will pray my Lord for thy forgiveness, for he
is gracious to me:

But I will separate myself from you, and the gods ye call on beside God, and
on my Lord will I call. Haply, my prayers to my Lord will not be with ill
success."

And when he had separated himself from them and that which they worshipped
beside God, we bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and each of them we made a
prophet:

And we bestowed gifts on them in our mercy, and gave them the lofty tongue of
truth."19

And commemorate Moses in "the Book;" for he was a man of purity: moreover he
was an Apostle, a Prophet:

From the right side of the mountain we called to him, and caused him to draw
nigh to us for secret converse:

And we bestowed on him in our mercy his brother Aaron, a Prophet.

And commemorate Ismael in "the Book;" for he was true to his promise, and was
an Apostle, a Prophet;

And he enjoined prayer and almsgiving on his people, and was well pleasing to
his Lord.

And commemorate Edris20 in "the Book;" for he was a man of truth, a Prophet:

And we uplifted him to a place on high.21

These are they among the prophets of the posterity of Adam, and among those
whom we bare with Noah, and among the posterity of Abraham and Israel, and
among those whom we have guided and chosen, to whom God hath shewed favour.
When the signs of the God of Mercy were rehearsed to them, they bowed them
down worshipping and weeping.

But others have come in their place after them: they have made an end of
prayer, and have gone after their own lusts; and in the end they shall meet
with evil:-

Save those who turn and believe and do that which is right, these shall enter
the Garden, and in nought shall they be wronged:

The Garden of Eden, which the God of Mercy hath promised to his servants,
though yet unseen:22 for his promise shall come to pass:

No vain discourse shall they hear therein, but only "Peace;" and their food
shall be given them at morn and even:

This is the Paradise which we will make the heritage of those our servants
who fear us.

We23 come not down from Heaven but by thy Lord's command. His, whatever is
before us and whatever is behind us, and whatever is between the two! And thy
Lord is not forgetful,-

Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth, and of all that is between them!
Worship Him, then, and abide thou steadfast in his worship. Knowest thou any
other of the same name?24

Man saith: "What! after I am dead, shall I in the end be brought forth
alive?"

Doth not man bear in mind that we made him at first, when he was nought?

And I swear by thy Lord, we will surely gather together them and the Satans:
then will we set them on their knees round Hell:

Then will we take forth from each band those of them who have been stoutest
in rebellion against the God of Mercy:

Then shall we know right well to whom its burning is most due:

No one is there of you who shall not go down unto it25-This is a settled
decree with thy Lord-

Then will we deliver those who had the fear of God, and the wicked will we
leave in it on their knees.

And when our clear signs are rehearsed to them, the infidels say to those who
believe: "Which of the two parties26 is in the best plight? and which is the
most goodly company?"

But how many generations have we brought to ruin before them, who surpassed
them in riches and in splendour!

SAY: As to those who are in error, the God of Mercy will lengthen out to them
a length of days

Until they see that with which they are threatened, whether it be some
present chastisement, or whether it be "the Hour," and they shall then know
which is in the worse state, and which the more weak in forces:

But God will increase the guidance of the already guided.

And good works which abide, are in thy Lord's sight better in respect of
guerdon, and better in the issue than all worldly good.

Hast thou marked him who believeth not in our signs, and saith, "I shall
surely have riches and children bestowed upon me?"

Hath he mounted up into the secrets of God? Hath he made a compact with the
God of Mercy?

No! we will certainly write down what he saith, and will lengthen the length
of his chastisement:

And we will inherit what he spake of, and he shall come before us all alone.

They have taken other gods beside God to be their help.27

But it shall not be. Those gods will disavow their worship and will become
their enemies.

Seest thou not that we send the Satans against the Infidels to urge them into
sin?

Wherefore be not thou in haste with them;28 for a small number of days do we
number to them.

One day we will gather the God-fearing before the God of Mercy with honours
due:29

But the sinners will we drive unto Hell, like flocks driven to the watering.

None shall have power to intercede, save he who hath received permission at
the hands of the God of Mercy.

They say: "The God of Mercy hath gotten offspring." Now have ye done a
monstrous thing!

Almost might the very Heavens be rent thereat, and the Earth cleave asunder,
and the mountains fall down in fragments,

That they ascribe a son to the God of Mercy, when it beseemeth not the God of
Mercy to beget a son!

Verily there is none in the Heavens and in the Earth but shall approach the
God of Mercy as a servant. He hath taken note of them, and numbered them with
exact numbering:

And each of them shall come to Him, on the day of Resurrection, singly:

But love will the God of Mercy vouchsafe to those who believe and do the
things that be right.

Verily we have made this Koran easy and in thine own tongue, that thou mayest
announce glad tidings by it to the God-fearing, and that thou mayest warn the
contentious by it.

How many generations have we destroyed before them! Canst thou search out one
of them? or canst thou hear a whisper from them?


_______________________

1 Comp. the first 37 verses of this Sura with Sura iii. 35-57 with reference
to the different style adopted by Muhammad in the later Suras, probably for
the purpose of avoiding the imputation of his being merely a poet, a
sorcerer, or person possessed. Sura lii. 29, 30; xxi. 5; lxviii. 2, 51. This
Sura is one of the fullest and earliest Koranic Gospel Histories, and was
recited to the Nagash or King of ƒÜthiopia, in the presence of the ambassadors
of the Koreisch. His. 220; Caussin, i. 392; Sprenger (Life of M.) p. 193.

2 See Sura lxviii. I, p. 32. Golius conjectured that these letters represent
coh ya'as, thus he counselled, and that they were added by some Jewish
scribe. Sprenger (Journ. of As. Soc. of Bengal, xx. 280) arranges them as
Ain, Sad, Kaf, Ha, Ya, and supposes them to be taken from the Arabic words
for Aisa (Jesus) of the Nazarenes, King of the Jews. But we can hardly
imagine that Muhammad would ascribe such a title to our Lord, and the word
which Dr. Sprenger uses for Jews is not the form peculiar to the Koran.

3 Lest they should desert the worship of the God of Israel.

4 Ar. Yahia. It may be true that the name in this form had never been given.
Otherwise, we have in this passage a misunderstanding of Luke i. 61, as well
as ignorance of the Jewish Scriptures. Comp. 2 Kings xxv. 23; 1 Chron. iii.
16; Ezra viii. 12; Jerem. xl. 8. Some commentators try to avoid the
difficulty by rendering samiyan, deserving of the name.

5 Or, with firm resolve. See Sura [xcvii.] iii. 36. The speaker is God.

6 To an eastern chamber in the temple to pray. Or it may mean, to some place
eastward from Jerusalem, or from the house of her parents.

7 Thus the Protev. Jac. c. 12 says that Mary, although at a later period,
[greek text] But Wahl, she laid aside her veil.

8 Gabriel.

9 See Sura [lxxxix.] vi. 9.

10 It is quite clear from this passage, and from verse 36, that Muhammad
believed Jesus to have been conceived by an act of the divine will. Comp.
Sura [xcvii.] iii. 52; see also note at Sura [xci.] ii. 81.

11 Or, the throes urged her to the trunk of, etc.

12 This was either the Infant which spoke as soon as born, or Gabriel. Comp.
Thilo Cod. Apoc. 136-139 on this passage. Beidhawi explains: from behind the
palm tree.

13 See Thilo Cod. Apoc. N. T. p. 138, and the Hist. Nat. Mar. c. 20, which
connects similar incidents with the flight into Egypt. Thus also Latona,
[greek text], Call. H. in Apoll. and [greek text], H. in Delum.

14 Or, settle, calm thine eye, refresh thine eye. The birth of a son is still
called korrat ol ain.

15 The anachronism is probably only apparent. See Sura iii. 1, n. Muhammad
may have supposed that this Aaron (or Harun) was the son of Imran and Anna.
Or, if Aaron the brother of Moses be meant Mary may be called his sister,
either because she was of the Levitical race, or by way of comparison.

16 See Sura [cxiv.] v. 109.

17 From the change in the rhyme, and from the more polemical tone of the
following five verses, it may be inferred that they were added at a somewhat
later period.

18 The title Nabi, prophet, is used of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as
depositaries of the worship of the one true God, but with a mission
restricted to their own families; whereas Houd, Saleh, Shoaib, etc., are
designated as (Resoul) apostles and envoys, charged with a more extended
mission to the tribes of Arabia. In Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad, etc., are
united the office and gift both of prophet (nabi) and apostle (resoul).

19 Made them to be highly praised. Beidh.

20 Enoch. Beidhawi derives the name Edris from the Ar. darasa, to search out,
with reference to his knowledge of divine mysteries. The Heb. Enoch, in like
manner, means initiated.

21 Comp. Gen. v. 24, and the tract Derek Erez in Midr. Jalkut, c. 42, where
Enoch is reckoned among the nine according to other Talmudists, thirteen
(Schroeder's Talm. und Rabb. Judenthum)-individuals who were exempted from
death and taken straight to Paradise. It should be observed that both here
and Sura xxi. 85, Edris is named after Ismael.

22 Maracci and Beidhawi, in absentid. Sale, as an object of faith. Beidhawi
ad f. in reward for their secret faith. Ullmann f√ºr die verborgene Zukunft.

23 This verse is to be understood as an answer on the part of Gabriel to
Muhammad's complaints of the long intervals between the revelations.

24 The idolaters called their deities Gods, but as Polytheists were unused to
the singular Allah, God.

25 Even the pious on their way to Paradise are to pass the confines of Hell.

26 The Koreisch, or the Muslims.

27 Or, glory, strength.

28 To call down judgments upon them.

29 As ambassadors come into the presence of a prince. Sale. This is implied
in the original.


SURA XXXVIII.-SAD [LIX.]

MECCA.-88 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

SAD.1 By the Koran full of warning! In sooth the Infidels are absorbed in
pride, in contention with thee.

How many generations have we destroyed before them! And they cried for mercy
but no time was it of escape!

And they marvel that a warner from among themselves hath come to them; and
the Infidels say, "This is a sorcerer, a liar:

Maketh he the gods to be but one god? A strange thing forsooth is this!"

And their chiefs took themselves off. "Go, said they, and cleave steadfastly2
to your gods. Ye see the thing aimed at.

We heard not of this in the previous creed.3 It is but an imposture:

To him alone of us all hath a book of warning been sent down?" Yes! they are
in doubt as to my warnings, for they have not yet tasted my vengeance.

Are the treasures of the mercy of thy Lord, the Mighty, the bounteous, in
their hands?

Is the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth and of all that is between
them theirs? Then let them mount up by cords!

Any army of the confederates4 shall here be routed.

Before them the people of Noah and Ad and Pharaoh the impaler5 treated their
prophets as impostors;

And Themoud, and the people of Lot, and the dwellers in the forest: these
were the confederates.

Nought did they all but charge the apostles with falsehood: Just, therefore,
the retribution.

And these (Meccans) await but one single trumpet blast-There shall be no
delaying it-

Yet they dare to say, "O our Lord! hasten our lot to us, before the day of
reckoning."

Put thou up with what they say: and remember our servant David, a man strong
of hand6, one who turned him to Us in penitence:

We constrained the mountains7 to join with him in lauds at even and at
sunrise;

And the birds which flocked to him, and would all return to him oft;

And we stablished his kingdom: and wisdom, and skill to pronounce clear
decisions, did we bestow on him.

Hath the story of the two pleaders8 reached thee, O Muhammad, when they
mounted the walls of his closet?

When they entered in upon David, and he was frightened at them, they said,
"Be not afraid; we are two opposing parties: one of us hath wronged the
other. Judge therefore with truth between us, and be not unjust, but guide us
to the right way.

Now this my brother had ninety and nine ewes, and I had but a single ewe; and
he said, make me her keeper. And he over-persuaded me in the dispute."

He said, "Certainly he hath wronged thee in asking for thine ewe to add her
to his own ewes: and truly many associates do one another wrong-except those
who believe and do the things that are right; and few indeed are they!" And
David perceived that we had tried him; so he asked pardon of his Lord, and
fell down and bowed himself and repented.

So we forgave him that his sin; and truly he shall have a high rank with Us,
and an excellent retreat in Paradise.

O David! verily we have made thee our vicegerent upon earth. Judge therefore
between men with truth, and follow not thy passions, lest they cause thee to
err from the way of God. For they who err from the way of God shall meet with
a grievous chastisement, for that they have forgotten the day of reckoning.

We have not created the heaven and the earth and what is between them for
nought. That is the thought of infidels; but woe to the infidels because of
the fire!

Shall we treat those who believe and do the things that are right like those
who propagate evil on earth? Shall we treat the God-fearing like the impious?

A blessed Book9 have we sent down to thee, that men may meditate its verses,
and that those endued with understanding may bear it in mind.

And Solomon gave we unto David. An excellent servant, for he loved to turn
him Godward.

Remember when at eventide the prancing10 chargers were displayed before him,

And he said, "Truly I have loved the love of earthly goods above the
remembrance of my Lord, till the sun hath been hidden by the veil of
darkness.11

Bring them back to me." And he began to sever the legs and necks.

We also made trial of Solomon, and placed a phantom12 on his throne:
whereupon he returned to Us (in penitence).

He said, O my Lord! pardon me, and give me a dominion that may not be to any
one beside me, for thou art the liberal giver.

So we subjected the wind to him; it ran softly at his bidding, whithersoever
he directed it:

And the Satans-every builder and diver-

And others bound in chains:13

"This," said we, "is our gift: be bounteous then, or withhold thy favours; no
account shalt thou render."

And his rank also is high with Us, and an excellent retreat.

And remember our servant Job when he cried to his Lord, "Verily, Satan hath
laid on me disease and pain."

"Stamp," said we, "with thy foot. This14 is to wash with; cool, and to
drink."

And we gave him back his family, and as many more with them in our mercy; and
for a monition to men of judgment.

And we said, "Take in thine hand a rod, and strike15 with it, nor break thine
oath." Verily, we found him patient!

How excellent a servant, one who turned to Us was he!

And remember our servants Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, men of might and
vision.16

With this cleansing did we cleanse them the remembrance of the abode of
Paradise.

And verily, they were, in our sight, of the elect and of the good.

And remember Ishmael and Elisha and Dhoulkefl, for all these were of the
just.

This is a monition: and verily, the pious shall have a goodly retreat:

Gardens of Eden, whose portals shall stand open to them:

Therein reclining, they shall there call for many a fruit and drink:

And with them shall be virgins of their own age, with modest retiring
glances:

"This is what ye were promised at the day of reckoning."

"Yes! this is our provision: it shall never fail."

Even so. But for the evil doers is a wretched home-

Hell-wherein they shall be burned: how wretched a bed!

Even so. Let them then taste it-boiling water and gore,

And other things of kindred sort!

To their leaders it shall be said, "This company shall be thrown in headlong
with you. No greetings shall await them, for they shall be burned in the
fire."

They shall say: "But ye, too! there shall be no welcome for you. It was ye
who prepared this for us, and wretched is the abode!"

They will say: "O our Lord! increase twofold in the fire, the punishment of
him who hath brought this upon us."

And they will say: "Why see we not the men whom we numbered among the wicked-

Whom we used to treat with scorn? Have they escaped our eyes?"17

Verily this is truth-the wrangling together of the people of the fire.

SAY: I am but a warner; and there is no God but God the One, the Almighty!

Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth, and of all that is between them,18 the
Potent, the Forgiving!

SAY: this is a weighty message,19

From which ye turn aside!

Yet had I no knowledge of what passed among the celestial chiefs when they
disputed,20

-Verily, it hath been revealed to me only because I am a public preacher-

When thy Lord said to the angels, "I am about to make man of clay,21

And when I have formed him and breathed my spirit into him, then worshipping
fall down before him."

And the angels prostrated themselves, all of them with one accord,

Save Eblis. He swelled with pride, and became an unbeliever.

"O Eblis," said God, "what hindereth thee from prostrating thyself before him
whom my hands have made?

Is it that thou are puffed up with pride? or art thou a being of lofty
merit?"

He said: "I am more excellent than he; me hast thou created of fire:22 of
clay hast thou created him."

He said: "Begone then hence: thou art accursed,23

And lo! my ban shall be on thee till the day of the reckoning."

He said: "O my Lord! respite me till the day of Resurrection."

He said, "One then of the respited shalt thou be,

Till the day of the time appointed."

He said: "I swear by thy might then that all of them will I seduce,

Save thy sincere servants among them."

He said: "It is truth, and the truth I speak. From thee will I surely fill
Hell, and with such of them as shall follow thee, one and all.

Say: I ask no wage of you for this, nor am I one who intermeddleth.

Of a truth the Koran is no other than a warning to all creatures.

And after a time shall ye surely know its message.


_______________________

1 The letter S. See Sura lxviii. p. 32.

2 These verses are said to have been revealed when, upon the conversion of
Omar, the Koreisch went in a body to Abu Talib and requested him to withdraw
his protection from Muhammad, but being put to silence by the latter,
departed in great confusion. Wah. Beidh.

3 That is, in the Christian religion, which teaches, Muhammad ironically
implies, a plurality of Gods.

4 This may allude to the so-called "confederacy" of the Koreisch against
Muhammad.

5 This term is also applied to Pharaoh, Sura lxxxix. 9, p. 54. He is said to
have fastened the Israelites to stakes, and then subjected them to various
torments.

addenda: This is the usual interpretation.  Lit. Lord of, or, possessor of
stakes (comp. li. 39 in Ar.), i.e., Forces.  Dr. Sprenger ingenuously
suggests that Muhammad¬ís Jewish informant may have described Pharaoh as rich
in ne√ßyb, i.e., fortresses; whereas, in Ar., na√ßyb, means an erection,
pillar, etc., for which Muhammad substituted the word for tent stakes.  Vol.
i. (470).

6 Prƒáditi (manibus) virtute. Mar.

7 Comp. Ps. cxlviii. 9, 10.

8 Two angels who pretended to appeal to David in order to convince him of his
sin in the matter of Uriah's wife. Comp. I Sam. xii.

9 The Psalms, if we suppose with N√∂ldeke, p. 99, that David is still
addressed: the Koran, if with Sale we refer the passage to Muhammad.

10 The Commentators say that the word used in the original implies that the
mares stood on three feet, and touched the ground with the edge of the fourth
foot.

11 Solomon, in his admiration of these horses, the result, we are told, of
David's or his own conquests, forgot the hour of evening prayer, and when
aware of his fault commenced their slaughter. The Tr. Sanhedr. fol. 21,
mentions Solomon's love for horses, and that he determined to have a large
stud; yet not to send the people to Egypt (Deut. xvii. 16) but to have them
brought to him out of Egypt (I Kings x. 28).

12 One of the Djinn. The absurd fiction may be seen in extenso in Sale.
Compare Tr. Sanhedr. fol. 20, b. and Midr. Jalkut on I Kings vi. ¬ß 182.

13 Thus the second Targum on Esther i. 2, mentions the four different kinds
of Demons which were "given into the hand" of Solomon-a legend derived from a
misunderstanding of Eccl. ii. 8.

14 The fountain which had sprung up. To this history the Talmudists have no
allusion.

15 Thy wife;-on whom he had sworn that he would inflict an hundred blows,
because she had absented herself from him when in need of her assistance, or
for her words (Job ii. 9). The oath was kept, we are told, by his giving her
one blow with a rod of a hundred stalks. This passage is often quoted by the
Muslims as authorising any similar manner of release from an oath
inconsiderately taken.

16 Lit. men of hand and of sight.

17 Lit. or do our eyes wander from them.

18 See verses 9, 26, above. It seems to have been one of the peculiarities of
Muhammad, as a person very deficient in imagination, to dwell upon and repeat
the same ideas, with an intensity which is at once an evidence of deep
personal conviction and consciousness, of the simple Arabian especially.

19 The connection between the concluding episode and the preceding part of
the Sura does not seem very clear. It probably originated at a different but
uncertain period.

20 About the creation of man.

21 Comp. Sura [xci.] ii. 28, ff.

22 Comp. Ps. civ. 4.

23 Lit. stoned. See Sura xv. 34, p. 114.


SURA XXXVI.-YA. SIN [LX.]

MECCA.-83 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

YA. SIN.1 By the wise Koran!

Surely of the Sent Ones, Thou,

Upon a right path!

A revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful,

That thou shouldest warn a people whose fathers were not warned and therefore
lived in heedlessness!

Just, now, is our sentence2 against most of them; therefore they shall not
believe.

On their necks have we placed chains which reach the chin, and forced up are
their heads:

Before them have we set a barrier and behind them a barrier, and we have
shrouded them in a veil, so that they shall not see.

Alike is it to them if thou warn them or warn them not: they will not
believe.

Him only shalt thou really warn, who followeth the monition and feareth the
God of mercy in secret: him cheer with tidings of pardon, and of a noble
recompense.

Verily, it is We who will quicken the dead, and write down the works which
they have sent on before them, and the traces which they shall have left
behind them: and everything have we set down in the clear Book of our
decrees.3

Set forth to them the instance of the people of the city4 when the Sent Ones
came to it.

When we sent two unto them and they charged them both with imposture-
therefore with a third we strengthened them: and they said, "Verily we are
the Sent unto you of God."

They said, "Ye are only men like us: Nought hath the God of Mercy sent down.
Ye do nothing but lie."

They said, "Our Lord knoweth that we are surely sent unto you;

To proclaim a clear message is our only duty."

They said, "Of a truth we augur ill from you:5 if ye desist not we will
surely stone you, and a grievous punishment will surely befall you from us."

They said, "Your augury of ill is with yourselves. Will ye be warned?6 Nay,
ye are an erring people."

Then from the end of the city a man came running:7 He said, "O my people!
follow the Sent Ones;

Follow those who ask not of you a recompense, and who are rightly guided.

And why should I not worship Him who made me, and to whom ye shall be brought
back?

Shall I take gods beside Him? If the God of Mercy be pleased to afflict me,
their intercession will not avert from me aught, nor will they deliver:

Truly then should I be in a manifest error.

Verily, in your Lord have I believed; therefore hear me."8

-It was said to him, "Enter thou into Paradise:" And he said, "Oh that my
people knew

How gracious God hath been to me, and that He hath made me one of His
honoured ones."

But no army sent we down out of heaven after his death, nor were we then
sending down our angels-

There was but one shout from Gabriel, and lo! they were extinct.

Oh! the misery that rests upon my servants! No apostle cometh to them but
they laugh him to scorn.

See they not how many generations we have destroyed before them?

Not to false gods is it that they shall be brought9 back,

But all, gathered together, shall be set before Us.

Moreover, the dead earth is a sign to them: we quicken it and bring forth the
grain from it, and they eat thereof:

And we make in it gardens of the date and vine; and we cause springs to gush
forth in it;

That they may eat of its fruits and of the labour of their hands. Will they
not therefore be thankful?

Glory be to Him, who hath created all the sexual pairs of such things as
Earth produceth,10 and of mankind themselves; and of things beyond their ken!

A sign to them also is the Night. We withdraw the day from it, and lo! they
are plunged in darkness;

And the Sun hasteneth to her place of rest. This, the ordinance of the
Mighty, the Knowing!

And as for the Moon, We have decreed stations for it, till it change like an
old and crooked palm branch.

To the Sun it is not given to overtake the Moon, nor doth the night outstrip
the day; but each in its own sphere doth journey on.

It is also a sign to them that we bare their posterity in the full-laden Ark;

And that we have made for them vessels like it on which they embark;

And if we please, we drown them, and there is none to help them, and they are
not rescued,

Unless through our mercy, and that they may enjoy themselves for yet awhile.

And when it is said to them, Fear what is before you and what is behind
you,11 that ye may obtain mercy. . . .

Aye, not one sign from among the signs of their Lord dost thou bring them,
but they turn away from it!

And when it is said to them, Give alms of what God hath bestowed on you,12
they who believe not say to the believers, "Shall we feed him whom God can
feed if He will? Truly ye are in no other than a plain error."

And they say, "When will this promise be fulfilled, if what ye say be true?"

They await but a single blast: as they are wrangling shall it assail them:

And not a bequest shall they be able to make, nor to their families shall
they return.

And the trumpet shall be blown, and, lo! they shall speed out of their
sepulchres to their Lord:

They shall say, "Oh! woe to us! who hath roused us from our sleeping place?
'Tis what the God of Mercy promised; and the Apostles spake the truth."

But one blast shall there be,13 and, lo! they shall be assembled before us,
all together.

And on that day shall no soul be wronged in the least: neither shall ye be
rewarded but as ye shall have wrought.

But joyous on that day shall be the inmates of Paradise, in their employ;

In shades, on bridal couches reclining, they and their spouses:

Therein shall they have fruits, and shall have whatever they require-

"Peace!" shall be the word on the part of a merciful Lord.

"But be ye separated this day, O ye sinners!

Did I not enjoin on you, O sons of Adam, 'Worship not Satan, for that he is
your declared foe,'

But 'Worship Me: this is a right path'?

But now hath he led a vast host of you astray. Did ye not then comprehend?

This is Hell with which ye were threatened:

Endure its heat this day, for that ye believed not."

On that day will we set a seal upon their mouths; yet shall their hands speak
unto us, and their feet14 shall bear witness of that which they shall have
done.

And, if we pleased, we would surely put out their eyes: yet even then would
they speed on with rivalry in their path: but how should they see?

And, if we pleased, we would surely transform them as they stand,15 and they
would not be able to move onward, or to return.

Him cause we to stoop through age whose days we lengthen. Will they not
understand?

We have not taught him (Muhammad) poetry,16 nor would it beseem him. This
Book is no other than a warning and a clear Koran,

To warn whoever liveth; and, that against the Infidels sentence may be justly
given.

See they not that we have created for them among the things which our hands
have wrought, the animals of which they are masters?

And that we have subjected them unto them? And on some they ride, and of
others they eat;

And they find in them profitable uses and beverages:

Yet have they taken other gods beside God that they might be helpful to them.

No power have they to succour them: yet are their votaries an army at their
service.

Let not their speech grieve thee: We know what they hide and what they bring
to light.

Doth not man perceive that we have created him of the moist germs of life?
Yet lo! is he an open caviller.

And he meeteth us with arguments,17 and forgetteth his creation: "Who," saith
he, "shall give life to bones when they are rotten?"

SAY: He shall give life to them who gave them being at first, for in all
creation is he skilled:

Who even out of the green tree hath given you fire18, and lo! ye kindle flame
from it.

What! must not He who hath created the Heavens and the Earth be mighty enough
to create your likes? Yes! and He is the skilful creator.

His command when He willeth aught, is but to say to it, BE, and IT IS.

So glory be to Him in whose hand is sway over all things! And to Him shall ye
be brought back.


_______________________

1 This Sura is said to have been termed by Muhammad "the heart of the Koran."
It is recited in all Muhammadan countries to the dying, at the tombs of
saints, etc. On Ya. Sin, see Sura lxviii. p. 32.

2 Sura xxxviii. 85, p. 129.

3 Lit. in the clear prototype, that is, in the Preserved Table, on which all
the actions of mankind are written down.

4 Antioch, to which Jesus is said to have sent two disciples to preach the
unity of God, and subsequently Simon Peter. This vague story, and that of the
seven sleepers in Sura xviii. are the only traces to be found in the Koran of
any knowledge, on the part of Muhammad, of the history of the Church
subsequent to the day of Pentecost, or of the spread of the Christian
religion.

5 Comp. Sura xxvii. 48; vii. 128, where, as in this passage, the word augur
refers to the mode of divination practised previous to Islam, by the flight
of birds.

6 Lit. if ye have been warned (will ye still disbelieve?).

7 Habib, the carpenter, who, as implied at verse 25, was martyred, and whose
tomb at Antioch is still an object of veneration to the Muhammadans.

8 Ullm. following Wahl, renders, Als sie (die stadtlente) darauf ihn
sch√§ndlich behandleten. The verb in the original is thus used in the 4th
conj. N√∂ldeke supposes that words to this effect have been lost from the
text. But of this there is no trace in the Commentators.

9 Or, the Apostles shall not return to them again. Ullm.

10 For instance, date trees, the female blossoms of which were carefully
impregnated, when requisite, by branches of the male plant. See Freyt. Einl.
p. 271.

11 The chastisements of this world and of the next.

12 On account of this precept, Itq. 35, and Omar b. Muhammad suppose the
verse to have originated at Medina.

13 The Muhammadans affirm that a space of forty years will intervene between
two blasts of the Trumpet. Maracci suggests that the idea of the two blasts
is derived from 1 Thess. iv. 16, "the voice of the archangel and . . . the
trump of God."

14 Thus Chagiga, 16; Taanith, 11. "The very members of a man bear witness
against him, for thus is it written (Is. xliii. 12), Ye yourselves are my
witnesses, saith the Lord." See also Sura [lxxi.] xli. 19, 20.

15 Lit. in their place.

16 See Sura xxvi. 225, p. III.

17 Lit. he setteth forth to us comparisons.

18 The form of the Arabic word is Rabbinic Hebrew.


SURA XLIII.-ORNAMENTS OF GOLD [LXI.]

MECCA.-89 Verses.

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Ha. Mim.1 By the Luminous Book!

We have made it an Arabic Koran that ye may understand:

And it is a transcript of the archetypal Book,2 kept by us; it is lofty,
filled with wisdom,

Shall we then turn aside this warning from you because ye are a people who
transgress?

Yet how many prophets sent we among those of old!

But no prophet came to them whom they made not the object of their scorn:

Wherefore we destroyed nations mightier than these Meccans in strength; and
the example of those of old hath gone before!

And if thou ask them who created the Heavens and the Earth, they will say:
"The Mighty, the Sage, created them both,"

Who hath made the Earth as a couch for you, and hath traced out routes
therein for your guidance;

And who sendeth down out of Heaven the rain in due degree, by which we
quicken a dead land; thus shall ye be brought forth from the grave:

And who hath created the sexual couples, all of them, and hath made for you
the ships and beasts whereon ye ride:

That ye may sit balanced on their backs and remember the goodness of your
Lord as ye sit so evenly thereon, and say: "Glory to Him who hath subjected
these to us! We could not have attained to it of ourselves:

And truly unto our Lord shall we return."

Yet do they assign to him some of his own servants for offspring! Verily man
is an open ingrate!

Hath God adopted daughters from among those whom he hath created, and chosen
sons for you?

But when that3 is announced to any one of them, which he affirmeth to be the
case with the God of Mercy,4 his face settleth into darkness and he is
silent-sad.

What! make they a being to be the offspring of God who is brought up among
trinkets, and is ever contentious without reason?

And they make the angels who are the servants of God of Mercy, females. What!
did they witness their creation? Their witness shall be taken down, and they
shall hereafter be enquired at.

And they say: "Had the God of Mercy so willed it we should never have
worshipped them." No knowledge have they in this: they only lie.

Have we ere this given them a Book?5 and do they possess it still?

But say they: "Verily we found our fathers of that persuasion, and verily, by
their footsteps do we guide ourselves."

And thus never before thy time did we send a warner to any city but its
wealthy ones said: "Verily we found our fathers with a religion, and in their
tracks we tread."

SAY,-such was our command to that apostle-"What! even if I bring you a
religion more right than that ye found your fathers following?" And they
said, "Verily we believe not in your message."

Wherefore we took vengeance on them, and behold what hath been the end of
those who treated our messengers as liars!

And bear in mind when Abraham said to his father and to his people, "Verily I
am clear of what ye worship,

Save Him who hath created me; for he will vouchsafe me guidance."

And this he established as a doctrine that should abide among his posterity,
that to God might they be turned.

In sooth to these idolatrous Arabians and to their fathers did I allow their
full enjoyments, till the truth should come to them, and an undoubted
apostle:

But now that the truth hath come to them, they say, "'Tis sorcery, and we
believe it not."

And they say, "Had but this Koran been sent down to some great one of the two
cities6 . . .!"

Are they then the distributors of thy Lord's Mercy?7 It is we who distribute
their subsistence among them in this world's life; and we raise some of them
by grades above others, that the one may take the other to serve him: but
better is the mercy of thy Lord than all their hoards.

But for fear that all mankind would have become a single people of
unbelievers, verily we would certainly have given to those who believe not in
the God of Mercy roofs of silver to their houses, and silver stairs to ascend
by;

And doors of silver to their houses, and couches of silver to recline on;

And ORNAMENTS OF GOLD: for all these are merely the good things of the
present life; but the next life doth thy Lord reserve for those who fear Him.

And whoso shall withdraw from the Warning of the God of Mercy, we will chain
a Satan to him, and he shall be his fast companion:

For the Satans will turn men aside from the Way, who yet shall deem
themselves rightly guided;

Until when man shall come before us, he shall say, "O Satan, would that
between me and thee were the distance of the East and West."8 And a wretched
companion is a Satan.

But it shall not avail you on that day, because ye were unjust: partners
shall ye be in the torment.

What! Canst thou then make the deaf to hear, or guide the blind and him who
is in palpable error?

Whether therefore we take thee off by death, surely will we avenge ourselves
on them;

Or whether we make thee a witness of the accomplishment of that with which we
threatened them, we will surely gain the mastery over them.9

Hold thou fast therefore what hath been revealed to thee, for thou art on a
right path:

For truly to thee and to thy people it is an admonition; and ye shall have an
account to render for it at last.10

And ask our Sent Ones whom we have sent before thee,

"Appointed we gods beside the God of Mercy whom they should worship?"11

Of old sent we Moses with our signs to Pharaoh and his nobles: and he said,
"I truly am the Apostle of the Lord of the worlds."

And when he presented himself before them with our signs, lo! they laughed at
them,

Though we shewed them no sign that was not greater than its fellow:12 and
therefore did we lay hold on them with chastisement, to the intent that they
might be turned to God.

Then they said, "O Magician! call on thy Lord on our behalf to do as he hath
engaged with thee, for truly we would fain be guided."

But when we relieved them from the chastisement, lo! they broke their pledge.

And Pharaoh made proclamation among his people. Said he, "O my people! is not
the kingdom of Egypt mine, and these rivers which flow at my feet?13 Do ye
not behold?

Am I not mightier than this despicable fellow,

And who scarce can speak distinctly?

Have bracelets of gold14 then been put upon him, or come there with him a
train of Angels?"

And he inspired his people with levity, and they obeyed him; for they were a
perverse people:

And when they had angered us, we took vengeance on them, and we drowned them
all.

And we made them a precedent and instance of divine judgments to those who
came after them.

And when the Son of Mary was set forth as an instance of divine power, lo!
thy people cried out for joy thereat:

And they said, "Are our gods or is he the better?"15 They put this forth to
thee only in the spirit of dispute. Yea, they are a contentious people.

Jesus is no more than a servant whom we favoured, and proposed as an instance
of divine power to the children of Israel.

(And if we pleased, we could from yourselves bring forth Angels to succeed
you on earth:)16

And he shall be a sign of the last hour;17 doubt not then of it, and follow
ye me: this is the right way;

And let not Satan turn you aside from it, for he is your manifest foe.

And when Jesus came with manifest proofs, he said, "Now am I come to you with
wisdom; and a part of those things about which ye are at variance I will
clear up to you; fear ye God therefore and obey me.

Verily, God is my Lord and your Lord; wherefore worship ye him: this is a
right way."

But the different parties18 fell into disputes among themselves; but woe to
those who thus transgressed, because of the punishment of an afflictive day!

For what wait they but for the hour "to come suddenly on them, while they
expect it not?"

Friends on that day shall become foes to one another, except the God-
fearing:-

"O my servants! on this day shall no fear come upon you, neither shall ye be
put to grief,

Who have believed in our signs and become Muslims:

Enter ye and your wives into Paradise, delighted."

Dishes and bowls of gold shall go round unto them: there shall they enjoy
whatever their souls desire, and whatever their eyes delight in; and therein
shall ye abide for ever.

This is Paradise, which ye have received as your heritage in recompense for
your works;

Therein shall ye have fruits in abundance, of which ye shall eat.

But in the torment of Hell shall the wicked remain for ever:

It shall not be mitigated to them, and they shall be mute for despair
therein,

For it is not we who have treated them unjustly, but it was they who were
unjust to themselves.

And they shall cry: "O Malec!19 would that thy Lord would make an end of us!"
He saith: "Here must ye remain."

We have come to you with the truth (O Meccans), but most of you abhor the
truth.

Have they drawn tight their toils for thee?20 We too will tighten ours.

Think they that we hear not their secrets and their private talk? Yes, and
our angels who are at their sides write them down.

SAY: If the God of Mercy had a son, the first would I be to worship him:

But far be the Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth, the Lord of the Throne,
from that which they impute to Him!

Wherefore let them alone, to plunge on, and sport, until they meet the day
with which they are menaced.

He who is God in the Heavens is God in earth also: and He is the Wise, the
Knowing.

And Blessed be He whose is the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth and of
all that is between them; for with Him is the knowledge of the Hour, and to
Him shall ye be brought back.

The gods whom they call upon beside Him shall not be able to intercede for
others: they only shall be able who bore witness to the truth and21 knew it."

If thou ask them who hath created them, they will be sure to say, "God." How
then hold they false opinions?

And one22 saith, "O Lord! verily these are people who believe not."

Turn thou then from them, and say, "Peace:" In the end they shall know their
folly.


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. I, p. 32.

2 Lit. it is in the Mother of the Book, i.e. the original of the Koran,
preserved before God.

3 That is, of the birth of a female.

4 Lit. which he imputeth to the God of Mercy, as his likeness.

5 To authorise angel-worship.

6 Supply, Mecca and Taief, we would have received it.

7 Lit. mercy, i.e. the gift and office of prophecy.

8 Lit. the two Easts, by which some understand the distance between the two
solstices.

9 Comp. Suras xl. 77; xxiii. 97; x. 47; xxix. 53; xxxvii. 179; xiii. 42.
These passages clearly show that Muhammad had at this period-towards the
close of his Meccan period-full faith in his ultimate success, and in the
fulfilment of his menaces against the unbelievers.

10 Lit. ye shall be examined in the end.

11 This verse is said (see N√∂ld. p. 100, n.) to have been revealed in the
temple at Jerusalem on the occasion of the night journey thither. See also
Weil's Muhammed der Prophet, p. 374.

12 Lit. sister.

13 See Sura [lxxix.] xxviii. 39, n.

14 Comp. Gen. xli. 42.

15 This was a captious objection made to Muhammad by the idolaters of Mecca
when he condemned their gods (Sura xxi. 98), as if they had said, "Jesus is
worshipped as a God by the Christians: does he come under your anathema
equally with our idols? we shall be content for our gods to be with him."

16 That is, as we caused Jesus to be born without a human father.

17 At his return to this earth. Some refer this to the Koran as revealing the
last Hour. Lit. He (or It) is for knowledge of the Hour.

18 Jewish and Christian sects.

19 Malec is one of the keepers of Hell, who specially presides over the
torments of the damned.

20 Lit. if they have twisted tight or set firmly the affair, i.e. their plots
against thee and the truth.

21 Or, and they (the Infidels). The Commentators say that Jesus, Ezra, and
the angels, will be allowed to intercede.

22 Muhammad.


SURA LXXII.-DJINN [LXII.]

MECCA.-28 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

SAY: It hath been revealed to me that a company of

DJINN1 listened, and said,-"Verily, we have heard a marvellous discourse
(Koran);

It guideth to the truth; wherefore we believed in it, and we will not
henceforth join any being with our Lord;

And He,-may the majesty of our Lord be exalted!-hath taken no spouse neither
hath he any offspring.

But the foolish among us hath spoken of God that which is unjust:

And we verily thought that no one amongst men or Djinn would have uttered a
lie against God.

There are indeed people among men, who have sought for refuge unto people
among Djinn: but they only increased their folly:

And they thought, as ye think, that God would not raise any from the dead.

And the Heavens did we essay, but found them filled with a mighty garrison,
and with flaming darts;

And we sat on some of the seats to listen, but whoever listeneth findeth an
ambush ready for him of flaming darts.

And truly we know not whether evil be meant for them that are on earth, or
whether their Lord meaneth guidance for them.

And there are among us good, and others among us of another kind;-we are of
various sorts:

And verily we thought that no one could weaken God on earth, neither could we
escape from him by flight:

Wherefore as soon as we had heard 'the guidance' we believed in it; and
whoever believeth in his Lord, need not fear either loss or wrong.

There are some among us who have resigned themselves to God (the Muslims);
and there are others of us who have gone astray. And whoso resigneth himself
to God pursueth the way of truth;

But they who go astray from it shall be fuel for Hell."

Moreover, if they (the Meccans) keep straight on in that way, we will surely
give them to drink of abundant waters,

That we may prove them thereby: but whoso withdraweth from the remembrance of
his Lord, him will He send into a severe torment.

It is unto God that the temples are set apart: call not then on any other
therein with God.

When the servant of God stood up to call upon Him, the djinn almost jostled
him by their crowds.

SAY: I call only upon my Lord, and I join no other being with Him.

SAY: No control have I over what may hurt or benefit you.

SAY: Verily none can protect me against God;

Neither shall I find any refuge beside Him.

My sole work is preaching from God, and His message: and for such as shall
rebel against God and his apostle is the fire of Hell! they shall remain
therein alway,-for ever!

Until they see their threatened vengeance they will be perverse! but then
shall they know which side was the weakest in a protector and the fewest in
number.

SAY: I know not whether that with which ye are threatened be nigh, or whether
my Lord hath assigned it to a distant day: He knoweth the secret, nor doth He
divulge his secret to any,

Except to that Apostle who pleaseth Him; and before him and behind him He
maketh a guard to march:

That He may know if his Apostles have verily delivered the messages of their
Lord: and He embraceth in his knowledge all their ways, and taketh count of
all that concerneth them.


_______________________

1 This interview with the Djinn took place at Nakhla, probably the "Wady
Mohram" of Burckhardt, midway between Mecca and Ta¬ãef, when Muhammad was
driven from Mecca. A.D. 620.


SURA LXVII.-THE KINGDOM [LXIII.]

MECCA.- 30 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BLESSED be He is whose hand is the KINGDOM! and over all things is He potent:

Who hath created death and life to prove which of you will be most righteous
in deed; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving!

Who hath created seven Heavens one above another: No defect canst thou see in
the creation of the God of Mercy: Repeat the gaze: seest thou a single flaw?

Then twice more repeat the gaze: thy gaze shall return to thee dulled and
weary.

Moreover we have decked the lowest heaven with lights, and have placed them
there to be hurled at the Satans, for whom we have prepared the torment of
the flaming fire.

And for those who believe not in their Lord is the torment of Hell; and
horrid the journey thither!

When they shall be thrown into it, they shall hear it braying:1 and it shall
boil-

Almost shall it burst for fury. So oft as a crowd shall be thrown into it,
its keepers shall ask them, "Came not the warner to you?"

They shall say, Yes! there came to us one charged with warnings; but we
treated him as a liar, and said, "Nothing hath God sent down: ye are in
nothing but a vast delusion."

And they shall say, "Had we but hearkened or understood, we had not been
among the dwellers in the flames;"

And their sin shall they acknowledge: but, "Avaunt, ye dwellers in the
flame."

But pardon and a great reward for those who fear their Lord in secret!

Be your converse hidden or open, He truly knoweth the inmost recess of your
breasts!

What! shall He not know who hath created? for He is the Subtil,2 the
Cognizant.

It is He who hath made the earth level for you: traverse then its broad
sides, and eat of what He hath provided.-Unto Him shall be the resurrection.

What! are ye sure that He who is in Heaven will not cleave the Earth beneath
you? And lo, it shall quake.

Or are ye sure that He who is in Heaven will not send against you a stone-
charged whirlwind? Then shall ye know what my warning meant!

And verily, those who flourish before you treated their prophets as liars:
and how grievous my wrath!

Behold they not the birds over their heads, outstretching and drawing in
their wings? None, save the God of Mercy, upholdeth them: for he regardeth
all things.

Who is he that can be as an army to you, to succour you, except the God of
Mercy? Truly, the infidels are in the merest delusion.

Or who is he that will furnish you supplies, if He withhold His supplies? Yet
do they persist in pride and in fleeing from Him!

Is he who goeth along grovelling on his face, better guided than he who goeth
upright on a straight path?

SAY: It is He who hath brought you forth, and gifted you with hearing and
sight and heart: yet how few are grateful!

SAY: It is He who hath sown you in the earth, and to Him shall ye be
gathered.

And they say, "When shall this threat be put in force, if ye speak the
truth?"

SAY: Nay truly, this knowledge is with God alone: and I am only an open
warner.

But when they shall see it nigh, sad shall wax the countenances of the
infidels: and it shall be said, "This is what ye have been calling for."

SAY: What think ye? Whether God destroy me or not, and those who follow me,
or whether he have mercy on us, yet who will protect the infidels from a
woeful torment?

SAY: He is the God of Mercy: in Him do we believe, and in Him put we our
trust; and ye shall know hereafter who is in a manifest error.

SAY: What think ye? If at early morn your waters shall have sunk away, who
then will give you clear running water?


_______________________

1 Thus Shakespeare uses the word braying of clamours of Hell; and Milton
speaks of braying horrible discord. Comp. Sura xxv. 12-21.

2 Der alles durchdringt. Ullm.; perspicax. Mar.; sagacious. Sale. The primary
meaning of the Arabic root is to draw near; hence the above signification, in
the sense of God's presence as interpenetrating all things: hence also the
other sense of benign, as in Sura [lxxxiii.] xlii. 18.


SURA XXIII.-THE BELIEVERS [LXIV.]

MECCA.1-118 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HAPPY now the BELIEVERS,

Who humble them in their prayer,

And who keep aloof from vain words,2

And who are doers of alms deeds,

And who restrain their appetites,

(Save with their wives, or the slaves whom their right hands possess: for in
that case they shall be free from blame:

But they whose desires reach further than this are transgressors:)

And who tend well their trusts and their covenants,

And who keep them strictly to their prayers:

These shall be the heritors,

Who shall inherit the paradise, to abide therein for ever.

Now of fine clay have we created man:

Then we placed him, a moist germ,3 in a safe abode;

Then made we the moist germ a clot of blood: then made the clotted blood into
a piece of flesh; then made the piece of flesh into bones: and we clothed the
bones with flesh: then brought forth man of yet another make4-Blessed
therefore be God, the most excellent of Makers5-

Then after this ye shall surely die:

Then shall ye be waked up on the day of resurrection.

And we have created over you seven heavens:6-and we are not careless of the
creation.

And we send down water from the Heaven in its due degree, and we cause it to
settle on the earth;-and we have power for its withdrawal:-

And by it we cause gardens of palm trees, and vineyards to spring forth for
you, in which ye have plenteous fruits, and whereof ye eat;

And the tree that groweth up on Mount Sinai; which yieldeth oil and a juice
for those who eat.

And there is a lesson for you in the cattle: We give you to drink of what is
in their bellies, and many advantages do ye derive from them, and for food
they serve you;

And on them and on ships are ye borne.

We sent Noah heretofore unto his people, and he said, "O my people! serve
God: ye have no other God than He: will ye not therefore fear Him?

But the chiefs of the people who believed not said, "This is but a man like
yourselves: he fain would raise himself above you: but had it pleased God to
send, He would have sent angels: We heard not of this with our sires of old;-

Verily he is but a man possessed; leave him alone therefore for a time."

He said, "O my Lord! help me against their charge of imposture."

So we revealed unto him, "Make the ark under our eye, and as we have taught,
and when our doom shall come on, and the earth's surface shall boil up,7

Carry into it of every kind a pair, and thy family, save him on whom sentence
hath already passed: and plead not with me for the wicked, for they shall be
drowned.

And when thou, and they who shall be with thee, shall go up into the ark;
say, 'Praise be unto God, who hath rescued us from the wicked folk.'

And say, 'O my Lord! disembark me with a blessed disembarking: for thou art
the best to disembark."'

Verily in this were signs, and verily we made proof of man.

We then raised up other generations after them;

And we sent among them an apostle from out themselves, with, "Worship ye God!
ye have no other God than He: will ye not therefore fear Him?"

And the chiefs of His people who believed not, and who deemed the meeting
with us in the life to come to be a lie, and whom we had richly supplied in
this present life, said, "This is but a man like yourselves; he eateth of
what ye eat,

And he drinketh of what ye drink:

And if ye obey a man like yourselves, then ye will surely be undone.

What! doth he foretell you, that after ye shall be dead and become dust and
bones, ye shall be brought forth?

Away, away with his predictions!

There is no life beyond our present life; we die, and we live, and we shall
not be quickened again!

This is merely a man who forgeth a lie about God: and we will not believe
him."

He said, "O my Lord! help me against this charge of imposture."

He said, "Yet a little, and they will soon repent them!"

Then did the shout of the destroying angel in justice surprise them, we made
them like leaves swept down by a torrent. Away then with the wicked people!

Then raised we up other generations after them-

Neither too soon, nor too late, shall a people reach its appointed time-

Then sent we our apostles one after another. Oft as their apostle presented
himself to a nation, they treated him as a liar; and we caused one nation to
follow another; and we made them the burden of a tale. Away then with the
people who believe not!

Then sent we Moses and his brother Aaron, with our signs and manifest power,

To Pharaoh and his princes; but they behaved them proudly, for they were a
haughty people.

And they said, "Shall we believe on two men like ourselves, whose people are
our slaves?"

And they treated them both as impostors; wherefore they became of the
destroyed.

And we gave Moses the Book for Israel's guidance.

And we appointed the Son of Mary, and His mother for a sign; and we prepared
an abode for both in a lofty spot,8 quiet, and watered with springs.

"O ye apostles! eat of things that are good: and do that which is right: of
your doings I am cognisant.

And truly this your religion is the one religion;9 and I am your Lord:
therefore fear me."

But men have rent their great concern, one among another, into sects; every
party rejoicing in that which is their own;

Wherefore leave them till a certain time, in their depths of error.

What! think they that what we largely, bestow on them of wealth and children,

We hasten to them for their good? Nay, they have no knowledge.

But they who are awed with the dread of their Lord,

And who believe in the signs of their Lord,

And who join no other gods with their Lord,

And who give that which they give with hearts thrilled with dread because
they must return unto their Lord,

These hasten after good, and are the first to win it.

We will not burden a soul beyond its power: and with us is a book, which
speaketh the truth; and they shall not be wronged:

But as to this Book, their hearts are plunged in error, and their works are
far other than those of Muslims, and they will work those works,

Until when we lay hold on their affluent ones with punishment; lo! they cry
for help:

-"Cry not for help this day, for by Us ye shall not be succoured:

Long since were my signs rehearsed to you, but ye turned back on your heels,

Puffed up with pride, discoursing foolishly by night."

Do they not then heed the things spoken-whether that hath come to them which
came not to their fathers of old?

Or do they not recognise their apostle; and therefore disavow him?

Or say they, "A Djinn is in him?" Nay! he hath come to them with the truth;
but the truth do most of them abhor.

But if the truth had followed in the train of their desires, the heavens and
the earth, and all that therein is, had surely come to ruin! But we have
brought them their warning; and from their warning they withdraw.

Dost thou ask them for remuneration? But, remuneration from thy Lord is best;
and He is the best provider.

And thou indeed biddest them to the right path;

But verily they who believe not in the life to come, from that path do surely
wander!

And if we had taken compassion on them, and relieved them from their trouble,
they would have plunged on in their wickedness, wildly wandering.10

We formerly laid hold on them with chastisement, yet they did not humble them
to their Lord, nor did they abase them;

Until, when we have opened upon them the door of a severe punishment, lo!
they are in despair at it.

It is He who hath implanted in you hearing, and sight, and heart; how few of
you give thanks!

It is He who hath caused you to be born on the earth: and unto Him shall ye
be gathered.

And it is He who maketh alive and killeth, and of Him is the change of the
night and of the day: Will ye not understand?

But they say, as said those of old:-

They say,"What! When we shall be dead, and have become dust and bones, shall
we, indeed, be waked to life?

This have we been promised, we and our fathers aforetime: but it is only
fables of the ancients."

SAY: Whose is the earth, and all that is therein;-if ye know?

They will answer, "God's." SAY: Will ye not, then reflect?

SAY: Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and the Lord of the glorious
throne?

They will say, "They are God's". SAY: Will ye not, then, fear Him?

SAY: In whose hand is the empire of all things, who protecteth but is not
protected? if ye know:

They will answer, "In God's." SAY: How, then, can ye be so spell-bound?

Yea, we have brought them the truth; but they are surely liars:

God hath not begotten offspring; neither is there any other God with Him:
else had each god assuredly taken away that which he had created,11 and some
had assuredly uplifted themselves above others! Far from the glory of God, be
what they affirm of Him!

He knoweth alike the unseen and the seen: far be He uplifted above the gods
whom they associate with Him!

SAY: O my Lord! If thou wilt let me witness the infliction of that with which
they have been threatened!

O my Lord! place me not among the ungodly people.

Verily, we are well able to make thee see the punishment with which we have
threatened them.

Turn aside evil with that which is better: we best know what they utter
against thee.

And SAY: "O my Lord! I betake me to Thee, against the promptings of the
Satans:

And I betake me to Thee, O my Lord! that they gain no hurtful access to me."

When death overtaketh one of the wicked, he saith, "Lord, send me back again,

That I may do the good which I have left undone."12 "By no means." These are
the very words which he shall speak:

But behind them shall be a barrier, until the day when they shall be raised
again.

And when the trumpet shall be sounded, the ties of kindred between them shall
cease on that day; neither shall they ask each other's help.

They whose balances shall be heavy, shall be the blest.

But they whose balances shall be light,-these are they who shall lose their
souls, abiding in hell for ever:

The fire shall scorch their faces, and their lips shall quiver therein:-

-"What! Were not my signs rehearsed unto you? and did ye not treat them as
lies?"

They shall say, "O our Lord! our ill-fortune prevailed against us, and we
became an erring people.

O our Lord! Bring us forth hence: if we go back again to our sins, we shall
indeed be evil doers."

He will say; "Be ye driven down into it; and, address me not."

A part truly of my servants was there, who said, "O our Lord! we believe:
forgive us, then, and be merciful to us, for of the merciful art thou the
best."

But ye received them with such scoffs that they suffered you to forget my
warning, and ye laughed them to scorn.

Verily this day will I reward then, for their patient endurance: the blissful
ones shall they be!

He will say, "What number of years tarried ye on earth?"

They will say, "We tarried a day, or part of a day;13 but ask the recording
angels."14

God will say, "Short indeed was the time ye tarried, if that ye knew it.

What! Did ye then think that we had created you for pastime, and that ye
should not be brought back again to us?" Wherefore let God be exalted, the
King, the Truth! There is no god but He! Lord of the stately throne! And
whoso, together with God, shall call on another god, for whom he hath no
proof, shall surely have to give account to his Lord. Aye, it shall fare ill
with the infidels.

And SAY: "O my Lord, pardon, and have mercy; for of those who show mercy, art
thou the best."


_______________________

1 This Sura is said by Wahidi Intr, and by Assuy≈±ti, 55, to be the last
Meccan revelation. But there seems to be no reason for this opinion.

2 In prayer. Eccl. v. I; Matt. vi. 7. But it may be understood of idle talk
generally.

3 See Sura xxii. 5, n.

4 That is, a perfect man at last, composed of soul and body. The verb halaka,
to create, is used throughout, for which I have necessarily substituted to
make, in order to retain the same word throughout the verse.

5 These words are said by most commentators on Sura vi. 93, to have been
uttered by Muhammad's scribe, Abdallah, on hearing the previous part of this
verse, and to have been adopted by the prophet, at the same moment, as
identical with his own inspirations.

6 Lit. seven paths-a Talmudic expression.

7 See Sura [lxxv.] xi. 42, n.

8 Comp. Sura xix. 22 ff., p. 119. Wahl understands this passage of Paradise.

9 Comp. Sura xxi. 92, p. 157.

10 There is no reliable tradition as to the nature of the visitation here
alluded to.

11 That is, each would have formed a separate and independent kingdom.

12 Or, in the (world) which I have left.

13 That is, our past life seems brevity itself in comparison with eternal
torment.

14 Lit. those who number, or keep account, i.e. our torments distract us too
much to allow us to compute.


SURA XXI.-THE PROPHETS [LXV.]

MECCA.-112 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

THIS people's reckoning hath drawn nigh, yet, sunk in carelessness, they turn
aside.

Every fresh warning that cometh to them from their Lord they only hear to
mock it,-

Their hearts set on lusts: and they who have done this wrong say in secret
discourse, "Is He more than a man like yourselves? What! will ye, with your
eyes open,1 accede to sorcery?"

SAY: "My Lord knoweth what is spoken in the heaven and on the earth: He is
the Hearer, the Knower."

"Nay," say they, "it is the medley of dreams: nay, he hath forged it: nay, he
is a poet: let him come to us with a sign as the prophets of old were sent."

Before their time, none of the cities which we have destroyed, believed: will
these men, then, believe?

And we sent none, previous to thee, but men to whom we had revealed
ourselves. Ask ye the people who are warned by Scriptures,2 if ye know it
not.

We gave them not bodies which could dispense with food: and they were not to
live for ever.

Then made we good our promise to them; and we delivered them and whom we
pleased, and we destroyed the transgressors.

And now have we sent down to you "the book," in which is your warning: What,
will ye not then understand?

And how many a guilty city have we broken down, and raised up after it other
peoples:

And when they felt our vengeance, lo! they fled from it.

"Flee not," said the angels in mockery, "but come back to that wherein ye
revelled, and to your abodes! Questions will haply be put to you."

They said, "Oh, woe to us! Verily we have been evil doers."

And this ceased not to be their cry, until we made them like reaped corn,
extinct.

We created not the heaven and the earth, and what is between them, for sport:

Had it been our wish to find a pastime, we had surely found it in ourselves;-
if to do so had been our will.

Nay, we will hurl the truth at falsehood, and it shall smite it, and lo! it
shall vanish. But woe be to you for what ye utter of God!

All beings in the heaven and on the earth are His: and they who are in his
presence disdain not his service, neither are they wearied:

They praise Him night and day: they rest not.3

Have they taken gods from the earth who can quicken the dead?

Had there been in either heaven or earth gods besides God, both surely had
gone to ruin. But glory be to God, the Lord of the throne, beyond what they
utter!

He shall not be asked of his doings, but they shall be asked.

Have they taken other gods beside Him? SAY; Bring forth your proofs that they
are gods. This is the warning of those who are with me, and the warning of
those who were before me: but most of them know not the truth, and turn
aside.

No apostle have we sent before thee to whom we did not reveal that "Verily
there is no God beside me: therefore worship me."

Yet they say, "The God of Mercy hath begotten issue from the angels." Glory
be to Him! Nay, they are but His honoured servants:

They speak not till He hath spoken;4 and they do His bidding.

He knoweth what is before them and what is behind them; and no plea shall
they offer

Save for whom He pleaseth; and they tremble for fear of Him.

And that angel among them who saith "I am a god beside Him," will we
recompense with hell: in such sort will we recompense the offenders.

Do not the infidels see that the heavens and the earth were both a solid
mass, and that we clave them asunder, and that by means of water we give life
to everything? Will they not then believe?

And we set mountains on the earth lest it should move with them, and we made
on it broad passages between them as routes for their guidance;

And we made the heaven a roof strongly upholden; yet turn they away from its
signs.

And He it is who hath created the night and the day, and the sun and the
moon, each moving swiftly in its sphere.

At no time5 have we granted to man a life that shall last for ever: if thou
then die, shall they live for ever?

Every soul shall taste of death:6 and for trial will we prove you with evil
and with good; and unto Us shall ye be brought back.

And when the infidels see thee they receive thee only with scoffs:-"What! is
this he who maketh such mention of your gods?" Yet when mention is made to
them of the God of Mercy, they believe not.

"Man," say they, "is made up of haste."7 But I will shew you my signs:8
desire them not then to be hastened.

They say, "When will this threat be made good? Tell us, if ye be men of
truth?"

Did the infidels but know the time when they shall not be able to keep the
fire of hell from their faces or from their backs, neither shall they be
helped!

But it shall come on them suddenly and shall confound them; and they shall
not be able to put it back, neither shall they be respited.

Other apostles have been scoffed at before thee: but that doom at which they
mocked encompassed the scoffers.

SAY: Who shall protect you by night and by day from the God of Mercy? Yet
turn they away from the warning of their Lord.

Have they gods beside Us who can defend them? For their own succour have they
no power; neither shall the gods they join with God screen them from Us.

Yes! we have given these men and their fathers enjoyments so long as their
life lasted. What! see they not that we come to a land and straiten its
borders9 Is it they who are the conquerors?

SAY: I only warn you of what hath been revealed to me: but the deaf will not
hear the call, whenever they are warned;

Yet if a breath of thy Lord's chastisement touch them, they will assuredly
say, "Oh! woe to us! we have indeed been offenders."

Just balances will we set up for the day of the resurrection, neither shall
any soul be wronged in aught; though, were a work but the weight of a grain
of mustard seed, we would bring it forth to be weighed: and our reckoning
will suffice.

We gave of old to Moses and Aaron the illumination,10 and a light and a
warning for the God-fearing,

Who dread their Lord in secret, and who tremble for "the Hour."

And this Koran which we have sent down is a blessed warning: will ye then
disown it?

Of old we gave unto Abraham his direction,11 for we knew him worthy.

When he said to his Father and to his people, "What are these images to which
ye are devoted?"

They said, "We found our fathers worshipping them."

He said, "Truly ye and your fathers have been in a plain mistake."

They said, "Hast thou come unto us in earnest? or art thou of those who
jest?"

He said, "Nay, your Lord is Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth, who hath
created them both; and to this am I one of those who witness:

-And, by God, I will certainly lay a plot against your idols, after ye shall
have retired and turned your backs."

So, he broke them all in pieces, except the chief of them, that to it they
might return, inquiring.

They said, "Who hath done this to our gods? Verily he is one of the unjust."

They said, "We heard a youth make mention of them: they call him Abraham."

They said, "Then bring him before the people's eyes, that they may witness
against him."

They said, "Hast thou done this to our gods, O Abraham?"

He said, "Nay, that their chief hath done it: but ask ye them, if they can
speak."

So they turned their thoughts upon themselves, and said, "Ye truly are the
impious persons:"

Then became headstrong in their former error12 and exclaimed,"Thou knowest
that these speak not."

He said, "What! do ye then worship, instead of God, that which doth not
profit you at all, nor injure you? Fie on you and on that ye worship instead
of God! What! do ye not then understand?"

They said:13 "Burn him, and come to the succour of your gods: if ye will do
anything at all."

We said, "O fire! be thou cold, and to Abraham a safety!"14

And they sought to lay a plot against him, but we made them the sufferers.

And we brought him and Lot in safety to the land which we have blessed for
all human beings:

And we gave him Isaac and Jacob as a farther gift, and we made all of them
righteous:

We also made them models who should guide others by our command, and we
inspired them with good deeds and constancy in prayer and almsgiving, and
they worshipped us.

And unto Lot we gave wisdom, and knowledge; and we rescued him from the city
which wrought filthiness; for they were a people, evil, perverse:

And we caused him to enter into our mercy, for he was of the righteous.

And remember Noah when aforetime he cried to us and we heard him, and
delivered him and his family from the great calamity;

And we helped him against the people who treated our signs as impostures. An
evil people verily were they, and we drowned them all.

And David and Solomon; when they gave judgment concerning a field when some
people's sheep had caused a waste therein; and we were witnesses of their
judgment.

And we gave Solomon insight into the affair; and on both of them we bestowed
wisdom and knowledge. And we constrained the mountains and the birds to join
with David in our praise: Our doing was it!

And we taught David the art of making mail15 for you, to defend you from each
other's violence: will ye therefore be thankful?

And to Solomon we subjected we subjected the strongly blowing wind; it sped
at his bidding to the land we had blessed; for we know all things:

And sundry Satans16 who should dive for him and perform other work beside:
and we kept watch over them.

And remember Job: When he cried to his Lord, "Truly evil hath touched me: but
thou art the most merciful of those who shew mercy."

So we heard him, and lightened the burden of his woe; and we gave him back
his family, and as many more with them,-a mercy from us, and a memorial for
those who serve us:

And Ismael, and Edris17 and Dhoulkefl18-all steadfast in patience.

And we caused them to enter into our mercy; for they were of the righteous:

And Dhoulnoun;19 when he went on his way in anger, and thought that we had no
power over him. But in the darkness he cried "There is no God but thou: Glory
be unto Thee! Verily, I have been one of the evil doers:"

So we heard him and rescued him from misery: for thus rescue we the faithful:

And Zacharias; when he called upon his Lord saying, "O my Lord, leave me not
childless: but there is no better heir than Thyself."20

So we heard him, and gave him John, and we made his wife fit for child-
bearing. Verily, these vied in goodness, and called upon us with love and
fear, and humbled themselves before us:

And her who kept her maidenhood, and into whom21 we breathed of our spirit,
and made her and her son a sign to all creatures.

Of a truth, this, your religion, is the one22 Religion, and I your Lord;
therefore serve me:

But they have rent asunder this their great concern among themselves into
sects. All of them shall return to us.

And whoso shall do the things that are right, and be a believer, his efforts
shall not be disowned: and surely will we write them down for him.

There is a ban on every city which we shall have destroyed, that they shall
not rise again,

Until a way is opened for Gog and Magog,23 and they shall hasten from every
high land,

And this sure promise shall draw on. And lo! the eyes of the infidels shall
stare amazedly; and they shall say, "Oh, our misery! of this were we
careless! yea, we were impious persons."

Verily, ye, and what ye worship beside God,24 shall be fuel for hell: ye
shall go down into it.

Were these gods, they would not go down into it; but they shall all abide in
it for ever.

Therein shall they groan; but nought therein shall they hear to comfort them.

But they for whom we have before ordained good things, shall be far away from
it:

Its slightest sound they shall not hear: in what their souls longed for, they
shall abide for ever:

The great terror shall not trouble them; and the angel shall meet them with,
"This is your day which ye were promised."

On that day we will roll up the heaven as one rolleth up25 written scrolls.
As we made the first creation, so will we bring it forth again. This promise
bindeth us; verily, we will perform it.

And now, since the Law was given, have we written in the Psalms that "my
servants, the righteous, shall inherit the earth."26

Verily, in this Koran is teaching for those who serve God.

We have not sent thee otherwise than as mercy unto all creatures.

SAY: Verily it hath been revealed to me that your God is one God; are ye then
resigned to Him? (Muslims.)

But if they turn their backs, then SAY: I have warned you all alike; but I
know not whether that with which ye are threatened be nigh or distant.

God truly knoweth what is spoken aloud, and He also knoweth that which ye
hide.

And I know not whether haply this delay be not for your trial, and that ye
may enjoy yourselves for a time.

My Lord saith: Judge ye with truth; for our Lord is the God of Mercy-whose
help is to be sought against what ye utter.


_______________________

1 Lit. while ye see it to be such.

2 Lit. the people or family of the admonition. Itq. 34 considers this verse
to have been revealed at Medina.

3 Or, they invent not (concerning Him). Comp. Rev. iv. 8.

4 Lit. they precede him not in speech.

5 Lit. before thee, which might seem to imply that the grant of immortality
had been made to Muhammad. I have therefore rendered, as in the text, to
avoid the ambiguity. Comp. Suras [xcvii.] iii. 182; [lxxxi.] xxix. 57, and
Weil's Life of Mohammad, p. 350.

6 Comp. Matt. xvi. 28; Heb. ii. 9. Hist. Josephi Fabr. Lign. c. 22 at the
end.

7 See the index under the word Man. The Rabbins teach that man was created
with innate evil propensities. See Schr der's Talm. Rabb.- Judenthum, p. 378.
8 That is, my teaching as to the future lot of the infidels, etc.

9 Muhammad appeals to the rapid progress of Islam as a proof of his divine
mission.

10 Ar. furquan-a derived by Muhammad from the Jews, constantly used in the
Talmud, and meaning as in Syr. and ƒÜth. deliverance, liberation. Thus, Sura
viii. 29, 42, and hence, illumination, revelation, generally. The usual
interpretation here and in other passages is the distinction, i.e. between
good and evil, lawful and unlawful. The title is applied to the Koran and
Pentateuch alike.

11 This story is taken in part verbatim from Midr. Rabbah on Gen. par. 17.
See also Schalscheleth Hakabala, 2; Maimon de Idol. ch. 1; and Yad
Hachazakah, vii. 6, who makes Abraham-in his 40th year-renounce star-worship,
break images, escape the wrath of the king by a miracle, and preach that
there is one God of the whole universe.

12 Lit. sie neigten sich nach ihren Kopfen. They were turned down upon their
heads. Ullm. and Sale in notes. But Ullm. in the text, verfielen sie wieder
in ihren Aberglauben.

13 The Rabbins make Nimrod to have been the persecutor of Abraham. Comp.
Targ. Jon. on Gen. xv. 7. Tr. Bava Bathra, fol. 91 a. Maimon. More Nevochim,
iii. 29. Weil, Legenden, p. 74.

14 Or, let peace be upon Abraham. Comp. Targ. Jon. on Gen. xi. 28, from the
mistranslation of which this legend took its rise, the word ur in Heb.
meaning fire. See also Targ. Jon. on. Gen. xv. 7. The legend was adopted by
some of the Eastern Christians; and commemorated in the Syrian Calendar on
Jan. 29. (Hyde de Rel. V. Pers. 74). Comp. the Abyssinian Calendar on Jan.
25. (Ludolf. Hist. p. 409).

15 It has been observed that the blacksmith has ever been looked upon with
awe by barbarians on the same principle that made Vulcan a deity. In
Abyssinia all artisans are Budah, sorcerers, especially the blacksmith, and
he is a social outcast, as among the Somal;   Throughout the rest of El-
Islam, the blacksmith is respected as treading in the path of David, the
father of the craft. Burton. First Footsteps in E. Africa, p. 33. The
numerous wars in which David was engaged, may have given rise to the myth of
his being the inventor of mail.

16 See Sura xxxviii. 37, p. 127.

17 See Sura xix. 55, 6, p. 121.

18 The man of the lot or portion. Or, of care, support. According to some
Elias, as others say, Isaiah. It is more probable, however, that he is he
Obadiah of 1 Kings xviii. 4, who supported 100 prophets in the cave, or
Ezechiel, who is called Kephil by the Arabs. See Niebuhr, Travels, ii. 265.

19 The man of the fish-Jonah.

20 See Suras [xcvii.] iii. 33; xix. p. 117, for the story of Zacharias in
full. The concluding sentence of this clause is obscure. It probably means
that even if no heir were vouchsafed to Zacharias, yet since God will be the
heir of all things he would take Zacharias to himself and thus abundantly
recompense him. See Sura [lxxix.] xxviii. 58.

21 See Sura [cix.] lxvi. 12. It is quite clear from these two passages that
Muhammad believed in the Immaculate and miraculous conception of Jesus.

22 That is, identical with that of the previous prophets, etc.

23 See Sura [lxix.] xviii. 93. Thus, the ancient Jewish and Christian legend
connects Gog and Magog with the end of the world. Rev. xx. 8. Pseudojon on
Lev. xxvi. 44. Comp. Numb. xi. 27. Gog, however, is probably the mountain
Ghef or Ghogh (see Reinegg's Beschreib. der Caucasus, ii. 79) and the
syllable Ma in Magog, the Sanscrit mah, maha great.

24 "Whenever a people is punished (for idolatry) the beings honoured by them
as gods, shall also be punished, for so it is written, on all the gods also
of Egypt will I inflict judgments." (Sakkah, 29.)

25 Ar. Sidjill, which is supposed by some to be the name of the angel who
writes down the actions of every man's life upon a scroll, which is rolled up
at his death (comp. Isai. xxxiv. 4); by others, to be the name of one of
Muhammad's secretaries.

26 Ps. xxxvii. 29. This is the only text quoted in the Koran.


SURA XXV.-AL FURKAN [LXVI.]

MECCA.-77 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

BLESSED be He who hath sent down AL FURKAN1 (the illumination) on his
servant, that to all creatures he may be a warner.

His the Kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth! No son hath He begotten! No
partner hath He in his Empire! All things hath He created, and decreeing hath
decreed their destinies.

Yet have they adopted gods beside Him which have created nothing, but were
themselves created:

And no power have they over themselves for evil or for good, nor have they
power of death, or of life, or of raising the dead.

And the infidels say, "This Koran is a mere fraud of his own devising, and
others have helped him with it,2 who had come hither by outrage and lie."3

And they say, "Tales of the ancients that he hath put in writing! and they
were dictated to him morn and even."

SAY: He hath sent it down who knoweth the secrets of the Heavens and of the
Earth. He truly is the Gracious, the Merciful.

And they say, "What sort of apostle is this? He eateth food and he walketh
the streets! Unless an angel be sent down and take part in his warnings,

Or a treasure be thrown down to him, or he have a garden that supplieth him
with food . . ."4 and those unjust persons say, "Ye follow but a man
enchanted."

See what likenesses they strike out for thee! But they err, and cannot find
their way.

Blessed be He who if he please can give thee better than that of which they
speak-Gardens, 'neath which the rivers flow: and pavilions will He assign
thee.

Aye, they have treated the coming of "the Hour" as a lie. But a flaming fire
have we got ready for those who treat the coming of the Hour as a lie.

When it shall see them from afar, they shall hear its raging and roaring,-

And when they shall be flung into a narrow space thereof bound together, they
shall invoke destruction on the spot:

-"Call not this day for one destruction, but call for destructions many."

SAY: Is this, or the Paradise of Eternity which was promised to the God-
fearing, best? Their recompense shall it be and their retreat;

Abiding therein for ever, they shall have in it all that they desire! It is a
promise to be claimed of thy Lord.

And on the day when he shall gather them together, and those whom they
worshipped beside God, he will say, "Was it ye who led these my servants
astray, or of themselves strayed they from the path?"

They will say, "Glory be to thee! It beseemed not us to take other lords than
thee. But thou gavest them and their fathers their fill of good things, till
they forgat the remembrance of thee, and became a lost people."

Then will God say to the Idolaters, "Now have they made you liars in what ye
say,5 and they have no power to avert your doom, or to succour you."

And whosoever of you thus offendeth, we will make him taste a great
punishment.

Never have we sent Apostles before thee who ate not common food, and walked
not the streets. And we test you by means of each other. Will ye be
steadfast? Thy Lord is looking on!

They who look not forward to meet Us say, "If the angels be not sent down to
us, or unless we behold our Lord. . . .¬î  Ah! they are proud of heart, and
exceed with great excess!

On the day when they shall see the angels, no good news shall there be for
the guilty ones, and they shall cry out, "A barrier that cannot be passed!"6

Then will we proceed to the works which they have wrought, and make them as
scattered dust.

Happier, on that day, the inmates of the Garden as to abode, and better off
as to place of noontide slumber!

On that day shall the heaven with its clouds be cleft, and the angels shall
be sent down, descending:

On that day shall all empire be in very deed with the God of Mercy, and a
hard day shall it be for the Infidels.

And on that day shall the wicked one7 bite his hands, and say, "Oh! would
that I had taken the same path with the Apostle!

"Oh! woe is me! would that I had not taken such an one8 for my friend!

It was he who led me astray from the Warning which had reached me! and Satan
is man's betrayer."9

Then said the Apostle, "O my Lord! truly my people have esteemed this Koran
to be vain babbling."

Thus have we given to every Prophet an enemy from among the wicked ones-But
thy Lord is a sufficient guide and helper.

And the infidels say, "Unless the Koran be sent down to him all at once. . .
." But in this way would we stablish thy heart by it; in parcels have we
parcelled it out to thee;10

Nor shall they come to thee with puzzling questions,11 but we will come to
thee with the truth, and their best solution.

They who shall be gathered upon their faces into hell, shall have the worst
place, and be farthest from the path of happiness.

Heretofore we gave the law to Moses, and appointed his brother Aaron to be
his counsellor:12

And we said, "Go ye to the people who treat our signs as lies." And them
destroyed we with utter destruction.

And as to the people of Noah! when they treated their Apostles as impostors,
we drowned them; and we made them a sign to mankind:-A grievous chastisement
have we prepared for the wicked!

And Ad and Themoud, and the men of Rass,13 and divers generations between
them:

Unto each of them did we set forth parables for warnings, and each of them
did we utterly exterminate.

Oft are this have the unbelieving Meccans passed by the city on which was
rained a fatal rain. What! Have they not seen it? Yet have they no hope of a
resurrection!

And when they see thee, they do but take thee as the subject of their
railleries. "What! Is this he whom God has sent as an Apostle?

Indeed he had well nigh led us astray from our gods, had we not persevered
steadfastly in their service." But in the end they shall know, when they
shall see the punishment, who hath most strayed from the path.

What thinkest thou? He who hath taken his passions as a god-wilt thou be a
guardian over him?

Thinkest thou that the greater part of them hear or understand? They are just
like the brutes! Yes! they stray even further from the right way.

Hast thou not seen how thy Lord lengtheneth out the shadow?14 Had He pleased
he had made it motionless.15 But we made the sun to be its guide;

Then draw it in unto Us with easy indrawing.

He it is who ordaineth the night as a garment, and sleep for rest, and
ordaineth the day for waking up to life:

He it is who sendeth the winds as the forerunner of his mercy (rain); and
pure water send we down from Heaven,

That we may revive by it a dead land: and we give it for drink to our
creation, beasts and men in numbers;

And we distribute it among them on all sides, that they may reflect: but most
men refuse to be aught but thankless.

Had we pleased, we had raised up a warner in every city.

Give not way therefore to the Infidels, but by means of this Koran strive
against them with a mighty strife.

And He it is who hath let loose the two seas,16 the one sweet, fresh; and the
other salt, bitter; and hath put an interspace between them, and a barrier
that cannot be passed.

And it is He who hath created man of water,17 and established between them
the ties of kindred and affinity: and potent is thy Lord.

Yet beside God do they worship what can neither help nor hurt them: and the
Infidel is Satan's helper against his Lord:

Still we have sent thee only as a herald and a warner.

SAY: I ask of you no recompense for it,18 except from him who is willing to
take the way to his Lord.

And put thou thy trust in Him that liveth and dieth not, and celebrate his
praise; (He fully knoweth the faults of his servants) who in six days created
the Heavens and the Earth, and whatever is between them, then mounted his
Throne: the God of Mercy! Ask now of the Wise concerning Him.

But when it is said to them, "Bow down before the God of Mercy," they say,
"Who is the God of Mercy? Shall we bow down to what thou biddest?" And they
fly from thee the more.

Blessed be He who hath placed in the Heaven the sign of the Zodiac!19 who
hath placed in it the Lamp of the Sun, and the light-giving Moon!

And it is He who hath ordained the night and the day to succeed one another
for those who desire to think on God or desire to be thankful.

And the servants of the God of Mercy are they who walk upon the Earth softly;
and when the ignorant20 address them, they reply, "Peace!"

They that pass the night in the worship of their lord prostrate and
standing:-

And that say, "O our Lord! turn away from us the torment of Hell, for its
torment is endless: it is indeed an ill abode and resting place!

Those who when they spend are neither lavish nor niggard, but keep the mean:-

Those who call on no other gods with God, nor slay whom God hath forbidden to
be slain, except for a just cause, and who commit not fornication (for he who
doth this shall meet the reward of his wickedness:

Doubled to him shall be the torment on the day of Resurrection; and in it
shall he remain, disgraced, for ever:-

Save those who shall repent and believe and do righteous works-for them God
will change their evil things into good things, for God is Gracious,
Merciful-

And whose turneth to God and doeth what is right, he verily will convert with
a true conversion):

And they who bear not witness to that which is false, and when they pass by
frivolous sport, pass on with dignity:-

And they who, when monished by the signs of their Lord, fall not down
thereat, as if deaf and blind:-

And who say, "O our Lord! give us in our wives and offspring the joy of our
eyes, and make us examples to those who fear thee:"

These shall be rewarded with the High Places of Paradise for their steadfast
endurance, and they shall meet therein with-Welcome and Salutation:-

For ever shall they remain therein: a fair abode and resting-place!

SAY: Not on your account doth my Lord care if ye call not on Him! ye have
treated his Apostle as an impostor: but bye and bye a punishment shall cleave
to them.


_______________________

1 See Sura [lxv.] xxi. 49.

2 Comp. Sura [lxxiii.] xvi. 105. The frequency with which Muhammad feels it
necessary to rebut this charge by mere denial is strongly indicative of its
truth.

3 "The meaning may possibly be that the teachers of Muhammad were persons who
had taken refuge in Arabia for offences and heresies." Sprenger, Life of M.
p. 96, n. Or, but they utter an injustice and a falsehood. N√∂ldeke combats
Dr. Sprenger's supposition that "Tales of the ancients" (verse 6) is a book.
Hist. of Qoran, p. 13.

4 Supply, we will not believe.

5 In your ascriptions of divinity to them. Beidh.

6 Or, far, far be they removed. The same words occur at the end of verse 55.
The Commentators doubt whether they are spoken by the wicked of the
impossibility of their attaining Paradise, or by the angels to the wicked.

7 Said by Beidh. to be the polytheist Okbeh, the son of Abu Mo'eyt, who by
Muhammad's persuasion professed Islam, but afterwards retracted to please
Ubei ben Khalaf. See Gagnier's Vie de Mahom. i. 362.

8 Ar. fulani (whence the Spanish fulano) identical with the Heb. p. 155, used
of a person only in Ruth iv. 1, but by the Rabbinic writers, constantly.

9 Or, abandoner.

10 This verse shews that the Koran was of gradual growth in the time of
Muhammad himself.

11 Lit. parables.

12 Lit. vizier.

13 It is uncertain whether Rass is the name of a city in Yemama; or merely,
as some interpret it, of a well near Midian; or, according to others, in the
territory of Hadramont.

14 Geiger is mistaken in supposing that this passage alludes to 2 Kings xx. 9
12, and his translation is inaccurate.

15 Lit. quiescent, i.e. always the same.

16 According to some commentators, Muhammad here speaks of the waters of the
Tigris, which do not mingle with the salt water of the sea till they have
reached a considerable distance from the river-mouth. See Zech. xiv. 8.

17 See Sura [cv.] xxiv. 44, n.

18 "Thou art taught that whoever would make a profit by the Law depriveth
himself of life." Pirke Aboth, i. 4. This precept is of frequent occurrence
in the Talmud.

19 Comp. Sura [xc.] xiii. 29; and the following Sura xvii. 109, n.

20 The idolaters.


SURA XVII.-THE NIGHT JOURNEY [LXVII.]

MECCA.1-111 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

GLORY be to Him who carried his servant by night2 from the sacred temple of
Mecca to the temple3 that is more remote, whose precinct we have blessed,
that we might shew him of our signs! for He is the Hearer, the Seer.

And4 we gave the Book to Moses and ordained it for guidance to the children
of Israel-"that ye take no other Guardian than me."

O posterity of those whom we bare with Noah! He truly was a grateful servant!

And we solemnly declared to the children of Israel in the Book, "Twice surely
will ye enact crimes in the earth, and with great loftiness of pride will ye
surely be uplifted."

So when the menace for the first crime5 came to be inflicted, we sent against
you our servants endued with terrible prowess; and they searched the inmost
part of your abodes, and the menace was accomplished.

Then we gave you the mastery over them6 in turn, and increased you in wealth
and children, and made you a most numerous host.

We said, "If ye do well, to your own behoof will ye do well: and if ye do
evil, against yourselves will ye do it. And when the menace for your latter
crime7 came to be inflicted, then we sent an enemy to sadden your faces, and
to enter the temple as they entered it at first, and to destroy with utter
destruction that which they had conquered.

Haply your Lord will have mercy on you! but if ye return, we will return:8
and we have appointed Hell-the prison of the infidels.

Verily, this Koran guideth to what is most upright; and it announceth to
believers

Who do the things that are right, that for them is a great reward;

And that for those who believe not in the life to come, we have got ready a
painful punishment.

Man prayeth for evil as he prayeth for good; for man is hasty.

We have made the night and the day for two signs: the sign of the night do we
obscure, but the sign of the day cause we to shine forth, that ye may seek
plenty from your Lord, and that ye may know the number of the years and the
reckoning of time; and we have made everything distinct by distinctiveness.

And every man's fate9 have we fastened about his neck: and on the day of
resurrection will we bring forth to him a book which shall be proffered to
him wide open:

-"Read thy Book:10 there needeth none but thyself to make out an account
against thee this day."

For his own good only shall the guided yield to guidance, and to his own loss
only shall the erring err; and the heavy laden shall not be laden with
another's load. We never punished until we had first sent an apostle:

And when we willed to destroy a city, to its affluent ones did we address our
bidding; but when they acted criminally therein, just was its doom, and we
destroyed it with an utter destruction.

And since Noah, how many nations have we exterminated! And of the sins of his
servants thy Lord is sufficiently informed, observant.

Whoso chooseth this quickly passing life, quickly will we bestow therein that
which we please-even on him we choose; afterward we will appoint hell for
him, in which he shall burn-disgraced, outcast:

But whoso chooseth the next life, and striveth after it as it should be
striven for, being also a believer,-these! their striving shall be grateful
to God:

To all-both to these and those-will we prolong the gifts of thy Lord; for not
to any shall the gifts of thy Lord be denied.

See how we have caused some of them to excel others! but the next life shall
be greater in its grades, and greater in excellence.

Set not up another god with God, lest thou sit thee down disgraced,
helpless.11

Thy Lord hath ordained that ye worship none but him; and, kindness to your
parents, whether one or both of them attain to old age with thee: and say not
to them, "Fie!" neither reproach them; but speak to them both with respectful
speech;

And defer humbly to them12 out of tenderness; and say, "Lord, have compassion
on them both, even as they reared me when I was little."

Your Lord well knoweth what is in your souls; he knoweth whether ye be
righteous:

And gracious is He to those who return to Him.

And to him who is of kin render his due, and also to the poor and to the
wayfarer; yet waste not wastefully,

For the wasteful are brethren of the Satans, and Satan was ungrateful to his
Lord:

But if thou turn away from them, while thou thyself seekest boons from thy
Lord for which thou hopest, at least speak to them with kindly speech:

And let not thy hand be tied up to thy neck; nor yet open it with all
openness, lest thou sit thee down in rebuke, in beggary.

Verily, thy Lord will provide with open hand for whom he pleaseth, and will
be sparing. His servants doth he scan, inspect.

Kill not your children for fear of want:13 for them and for you will we
provide. Verily, the killing them is a great wickedness.

Have nought to do with adultery; for it is a foul thing and an evil way:

Neither slay any one whom God hath forbidden you to slay, unless for a just
cause: and whosoever shall be slain wrongfully, to his heir14 have we given
powers; but let him not outstep bounds in putting the manslayer to death, for
he too, in his turn, will be assisted and avenged.

And touch not the substance of the orphan, unless in an upright way, till he
attain his age of strength: And perform your covenant; verily the covenant
shall be enquired of:

And give full measure when you measure, and weigh with just balance. This
will be better, and fairest for settlement:

And follow not that of which thou hast no knowledge;15 because the hearing
and the sight and the heart,-each of these shall be enquired of:

And walk not proudly on the earth, for thou canst not cleave the earth,
neither shalt thou reach to the mountains in height:

All this is evil; odious to thy Lord.

This is a part of the wisdom which thy Lord hath revealed to thee. Set not up
any other god with God, lest thou be cast into Hell, rebuked, cast away.

What! hath your Lord prepared sons for you, and taken for himself daughters
from among the angels? Indeed, ye say a dreadful saying.

Moreover, for man's warning have we varied16 this Koran: Yet it only
increaseth their flight from it.

SAY: If, as ye affirm, there were other gods with Him, they would in that
case seek occasion against the occupant of the throne:

Glory to Him! Immensely high is He exalted above their blasphemies!

The seven heavens17 praise him, and the earth, and all who are therein;
neither is there aught which doth not celebrate his praise; but their
utterances of praise ye understand not. He is kind, indulgent.

When thou recitest the Koran we place between thee and those who believe not
in the life to come, a dark veil;

And we put coverings over their hearts lest they should understand it, and in
their ears a heaviness;

And when in the Koran thou namest thy One Lord, they turn their backs in
flight.

We well know why they hearken, when they hearken unto thee, and when they
whisper apart; when the wicked say, "Ye follow no other than a man
enchanted."

See what likenesses they strike out for thee! But they are in error, neither
can they find the path.

They also say, "After we shall have become bones and dust, shall we in sooth
be raised a new creation?"

SAY: "Yes, though ye were stones, or iron, or any other creature, to your
seeming, yet harder to be raised." But they will say, "Who shall bring us
back?" SAY: "He who created you at first." And they will wag their heads at
thee, and say, "When shall this be?" SAY: "Haply it is nigh."

On that day shall God call you forth, and ye shall answer by praising Him;
and ye shall seem to have tarried but a little while.

Enjoin my servants to speak in kindly sort: Verily Satan would stir up
strifes among them, for Satan is man's avowed foe.

Your Lord well knoweth you: if He please He will have mercy on you; or if He
please He will chastise you: and we have not sent thee to be a guardian over
them.

Thy Lord hath full knowledge of all in the heavens and the earth. Higher
gifts have we given to some of the prophets than to others, and the Psalter
we gave to David.

SAY: Call ye upon those whom ye fancy to be gods beside Him; yet they will
have no power to relieve you from trouble, or to shift it elsewhere.

Those whom ye call on, themselves desire union with their Lord,18 striving
which of them shall be nearest to him: they also hope for his mercy and fear
his chastisement. Verily the chastisement of thy Lord is to be dreaded.

There is no city which we will not destroy before the day of Resurrection, or
chastise it with a grievous chastisement. This is written in the Book.

Nothing hindered us from sending thee with the power of working miracles,
except that the peoples of old treated them as lies. We gave to Themoud19 the
she-camel before their very eyes, yet they maltreated her! We send not a
prophet with miracles but to strike terror.

And remember when we said to thee, Verily, thy Lord is round about mankind;
we ordained the vision20 which we shewed thee, and likewise the cursed tree
of the Koran, only for men to dispute of; we will strike them with terror;
but it shall only increase in them enormous wickedness:

And when we said to the Angels, "Prostrate yourselves before Adam:" and they
all prostrated them, save Eblis. "What!" said he, "shall I bow me before him
whom thou hast created of clay?

Seest thou this man whom thou hast honoured above me? Verily, if thou respite
me till the day of Resurrection, I will destroy his offspring, except a few."

He said, "Begone; but whosoever of them shall follow thee, verily, Hell shall
be your recompense; an ample recompense!

And entice such of them as thou canst by thy voice; assault them with thy
horsemen and thy footmen;21 be their partner in their riches and in their
children, and make them promises: but Satan shall make them only deceitful
promises.

As to my servants, no power over them shalt thou have; And thy Lord will be
their sufficient guardian."

It is your Lord who speedeth onward the ships for you in the sea, that ye may
seek of his abundance; for he is merciful towards you.

When a misfortune befalleth you out at sea, they whom ye invoke are not to be
found: God alone is there: yet when he bringeth you safe to dry land, ye
place yourselves at a distance from Him. Ungrateful is man.

What! are ye sure, then, that he will not cleave the sides of the earth for
you? or that he will not send against you a whirlwind charged with sands?
Then shall ye find no protector.

Or are ye sure that he will not cause you to put back to sea a second time,
and send against you a storm blast, and drown you, for that ye have been
thankless? Then shall ye find no helper against us therein.

And now have we honoured the children of Adam: by land and by sea have we
carried them: food have we provided for them of good things, and with
endowments beyond many of our creatures have we endowed them.

One day we will summon all men with their leaders: they whose book shall be
given into their right hand, shall read their book, and not be wronged a
thread:

And he who has been blind here, shall be blind hereafter, and wander yet more
from the way.

And, verily, they had well nigh beguiled thee from what we revealed to thee,
and caused thee to invent some other thing in our name: but in that case they
would surely have taken thee as a friend;22

And had we not settled thee, thou hadst well nigh leaned to them a little:

In that case we would surely have made thee taste of woe23 in life and of woe
in death: then thou shouldest not have found a helper against us.

And truly they had almost caused thee to quit the land, in order wholly to
drive thee forth from it:24 but then, themselves should have tarried but a
little after thee.

This was our way with the Apostles we have already sent before thee, and in
this our way thou shalt find no change.

Observe prayer at sunset, till the first darkening of the night, and the
daybreak reading-for the daybreak reading hath its witnesses,

And watch unto it in the night: this shall be an excess in service:25 it may
be that thy Lord will raise thee to a glorious station:

And say, "O my Lord, cause me to enter26 with a perfect entry, and to come
forth with a perfect forthcoming, and give me from thy presence a helping
power:"

And SAY: Truth is come and falsehood is vanished. Verily, falsehood is a
thing that vanisheth.

And we send down of the Koran that which is a healing and a mercy to the
faithful: But it shall only add to the ruin of the wicked.

When we bestow favours on man, he withdraweth and goeth aside; but when evil
toucheth him, he is despairing.

SAY: Every one acteth after his own manner: but your Lord well knoweth who is
best guided in his path.

And they will ask thee of the Spirit.27 SAY: The Spirit proceedeth at my
Lord's command: but of knowledge, only a little to you is given.

If we pleased, we could take away what we have revealed to thee: none couldst
thou then find thee to undertake thy cause with us,

Save as a mercy from thy Lord; great, verily, is his favour towards thee.

SAY: Verily, were men and Djinn assembled to produce the like of this Koran,
they could not produce its like, though the one should help the other.

And of a truth we have set out to men every kind of similitude in this Koran,
but most men have refused everything except unbelief.

And they say, "By no means will we believe on thee till thou cause a fountain
to gush forth for us from the earth;

Or, till thou have a garden of palm-trees and grapes, and thou cause forth-
gushing rivers to gush forth in its midst;

Or thou make the heaven to fall on us, as thou hast given out, in pieces; or
thou bring God and the angels to vouch for thee;

Or thou have a house of gold; or thou mount up into Heaven; nor will we
believe in thy mounting up, till thou send down to us a book which we may
read." SAY: Praise be to my Lord! Am I more than a man, an apostle?

And what hindereth men from believing, when the guidance hath come to them,
but that they say, "Hath God sent a man as an apostle?"

SAY: Did angels walk the earth as its familiars, we had surely sent them an
angel-apostle out of Heaven.

SAY: God is witness enough between you and me. His servants He scanneth,
eyeth.

And He whom God shall guide will be guided indeed; and whom he shall mislead
thou shalt find none to assist, but Him: and we will gather them together on
the day of the resurrection, on their faces, blind and dumb and deaf: Hell
shall be their abode: so oft as its fires die down, we will rekindle the
flame.

This shall be their reward for that they believed not our signs and said,
"When we shall have become bones and dust, shall we surely be raised a new
creation?"

Do they not perceive that God, who created the Heavens and the Earth, is able
to create their like? And he hath ordained them a term; there is no doubt of
it: but the wicked refuse everything except unbelief.

SAY: If ye held the treasures of my Lord's mercy ye would certainly refrain
from them through fear of spending them: for man is covetous.

We therefore gave to Moses nine clear signs. Ask thou, therefore, the
children of Israel how it was when he came unto them, and Pharaoh said to
him, "Verily, I deem thee, O Moses, a man enchanted."

Said Moses, "Thou knowest that none hath sent down these clear signs but the
Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth; and I surely deem thee, O Pharaoh, a
person lost."

So Pharaoh sought to drive them out of the land; but we drowned him and all
his followers.

And after his death, we said to the children of Israel, "Dwell ye in the
land:" and when the promise of the next life shall come to pass, we will
bring you both up together to judgment. In truth have we sent down the Koran,
and in truth hath it descended, and we have only sent thee to announce and to
warn.

And we have parcelled out the Koran into sections, that thou mightest recite
it unto men by slow degrees, and we have sent it down piecemeal.

SAY: Believe ye therein or believe ye not? They verily to whom knowledge had
been given previously, fall on their faces worshipping when it is recited to
them, and say: "Glory be to God! the promise of our Lord is made good!"

They fall down on their faces weeping, and It increaseth their humility.

SAY: Call upon God (Allah),28 or call upon the God of Mercy (Arrahman), by
whichsoever ye will invoke him: He hath most excellent names. And be not loud
in thy prayer, neither pronounce it too low;29 but between these follow a
middle way:

And SAY: Praise be to God who hath not begotten a son, who hath no partner in
the Kingdom, nor any protector on account of weakness. And magnify him by
proclaiming His greatness.30


_______________________

1 Verses 12, 23-41, 75-82, 87, are supposed by many commentators to have
originated at Medina.

2 Waquidy says the night-journey took place on the 17th of Rabhy' 1, a
twelvemonth before the Hejira.

3 Of Jerusalem; and thence through the seven heavens to the throne of God on
the back of Borak, accompanied by Gabriel, according to some traditions;
while others, and those too of early date, regard it as no more than a
vision. It was, however, in all probability a dream. Muir ii. 219; N√∂ld. p.
102, who give the Muhammadan sources of information.

4 It is probable that as this verse has no real or apparent connection with
the preceding, a verse may have been lost, and that verse 1 has been placed
at the head of the Sura merely because the night-journey is elsewhere alluded
to in it.

5 According to the commentators the slaughter of Isaiah and the imprisonment
of Jeremiah, punished by the invasion of the Assyrians.

6 Over Sennacherib.

7 The slaying Zacharias, John Baptist, and Jesus, punished by the destruction
of Jerusalem by the Romans. Comp. Tr. Gittin, fol. 57, where we read of the
sufferings drawn down upon the Jews in consequence of the former of these
crimes.

8 That is, if ye return to sin, we will return to punish.

9 Lit. bird.

10 Comp. Mischnah Aboth, 3, 20.

11 Comp. in Heb. Isai. liii. 3.

12 Lit. lower a wing of humility.

13 Comp. Sura [lxxxix.] vi. 151; lxxxi. 8, p. 45. Zaid, the sceptical seeker
after truth, is reported to have discouraged the killing of daughters,
saying, "I will support them." Kit√¢b al Wackidi, p. 255. See note at Sura
[xcvii.] iii. 18.

14 Or, next of kin.

15 Or, run not after vain things which will avail nought. Or, accuse not any
of a crime if thou art not sure of his guilt.

16 Used a variety of arguments and illustrations.

17 Thus Tr. Chagiga, fol. 9 b. "There are seven heavens (rakian): the veil,
the firmament, the clouds, the habitation, the abode, the fixed seat, the
araboth." See Wetst. on 2 Cor. xii. 2.

18 In obvious allusion to the saint-worship of the Christians.

19 See Sura [lxxxvii.] vii. 71.

20 See note on v. 1. The tree is Zakkoum, Sura [xlv.] lvi. The Rabbins teach
that food of the bitterest herbs is one of the punishments of Hell. See
Schr√∂der's Rabb. und. Talm. Judenthum, p. 403.

21 That is, with all thy might.

22 Zamakshary relates that this passage was revealed when the Thaqyfites in
framing the document of agreement between themselves and Muhammad, required
that the words requiring the prostrations in worship should not be added. The
writer looked at the prophet, who stood by in silence, when Omar stood up and
drew his sword with menacing words. They replied, We speak not thee but to
Muhammad. Then this verse was revealed. Thus Dr. Sprenger. Life, p. 186. He
renders the last clause, but at the right moment a friend reprehended thee.

23 Lit. weakness, languors.

24 "The Jews, envious of Muhammad's good reception and stay there, told him,
by way of counsel, that Syria was the land of the Prophets, and that if he
was really a prophet, he ought to go there." Sale from Djelal Eddin ap. Mar.
Geiger, p. 12, quotes a Talmudical saying to the same effect, but without any
reference.

25 A work of supererogation, and therefore doubly meritorious. Thus Tr.
Berachoth, fol. 4. The word station (mekam) is still used of the nearness to
God, attained in spiritual ecstacies, etc.

26 That is, to enter the Grave or Mecca. Lit. with an entry of truth.

27 The word spirit is probably to be understood of the Angel Gabriel. Comp. 1
Kings xxii. 21. Others understand it of the immaterial soul of man. See note
on Sura [xci.] ii. 81.

28 The infidels hearing Muhammad say, Ya Allah! Ya Rahman! in his prayers,
imagined that he was addressing two Deities; hence this passage. Comp.
[lxxiii.] xvi. 52; [lxvi.] xxv. 61. As this title of God (Rahman) disappears
from the later Suras, it has been inferred that Muhammad's original intention
was to have combined it with Allah, but that through fear lest Allah and
Arrahman should be supposed to be two Gods, he dropped the latter.-This title
was applied to their deities by the Himyarites; and it occurs in Ps. lxxviii.
38, and Ex. xxxiv. 6. The root is not found in ƒÜthiopic.

29 The Talm. Tr. Berachoth, 31, 2, forbids loudness in prayer by the example
of Hannah.

30 Lit. magnify Him by magnifying.


SURA XXVII.-THE ANT [LXVIII.]

MECCA.-95 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

TA. SAD.1 These are the signs (verses) of the Koran and of the lucid Book;

Guidance and glad tidings to the believers who observe prayer and pay the
stated alms, and believe firmly-do they-in the life to come.

As to those who believe not in the life to come, we have made their own
doings fair seeming to them, and they are bewildered therein.

These are they whom the woe of chastisement awaiteth; and in the next life
they shall suffer-yes shall they-greatest loss;

But thou hast certainly received the Koran from the Wise, the Knowing.

Bear in mind when Moses said to his family, "I have perceived a fire;

I will bring you tidings from it, or will bring you a blazing brand, that ye
may warm you."

And when he came to it, he was called to, "Blessed, He who is in the fire,
and He who is about it; and glory be to God, the Lord of the worlds!

O Moses! verily, I am God, the Mighty, the Wise!

Throw down now thy staff." And when he saw that it moved itself as though it
were a serpent, he retreated backward and returned not. "O Moses, fear not;
for the Sent Ones fear not in my presence,

Save he who having done amiss shall afterwards exchange the evil for good;
for I am Forgiving, Merciful.

Put now thy hand into thy bosom: it shall come forth white, yet free from
hurt:2 one of nine signs to Pharaoh and his people; for a perverse people are
they."

And when our signs were wrought in their very sight,3 they said, "This is
plain magic."

And though in their souls they knew them to be true, yet in their wickedness
and pride they denied them. But see what was the end of the corrupt doers!

And of old we gave knowledge to David and Solomon: and they said, "Praise be
to God, who hath made us to excel many of his believing servants!"

And in knowledge Solomon was David's heir. And he said, "O men, we have been
taught the speech of birds,4 and are endued with everything. This is indeed a
clear boon from God."

And to Solomon were gathered his hosts of Djinn5 and men and birds, and they
were marched on in bands,

Till they reached the Valley of Ants. Said AN ANT, "O ye ants, enter your
dwellings, lest Solomon and his army crush you and know it not."

Then smiled Solomon, laughing at her words, and he said, "Stir me up, O Lord,
to be thankful for thy favour which thou hast shewed upon me and upon my
parents, and to do righteousness that shall be well pleasing to thee, and
bring me in, by thy mercy, among thy servants the righteous."

And he reviewed the birds, and said, "How is it that I see not the lapwing?
Is it one of the absent?

Surely, with a severe chastisement will I chastise it, or I will certainly
slaughter it, unless it bring me a clear excuse."

Nor tarried it long ere it came and said, "I have gained the knowledge that
thou knowest not, and with sure tidings have I come to thee from Saba:

I found a woman reigning over them, gifted with everything, and she hath a
splendid throne;

And I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of God; and Satan
hath made their works fair seeming to them, so that he hath turned them from
the Way: wherefore they are not guided,

To the worship of God, who bringeth to light the secret things of heaven and
earth, and knoweth what men conceal and what they manifest:

God! there is no god but He! the lord of the glorious throne!"

He said, "We shall see whether thou hast spoken truth, or whether thou art of
them that lie.

Go with this my letter and throw it down to them: then turn away from them
and await their answer."

She said, "O my nobles! an honourable letter hath been thrown down to me:

It is from Solomon; and it is this: 'In the name of God, the Compassionate,
the Merciful!

Set not up yourselves against me, but come to me submitting (Muslims).' "

She said, "O my nobles, advise me in mine affair: I decide it not without
your concurrence."6

They said, "We are endued with strength and are endued with mighty valour.-
But to command is thine: See therefore what thou wilt command us."

She said, "Kings when they enter a city spoil it, and abase the mightiest of
its people: and in like manner will these also do.

But I will send to them with a gift, and await what my envoys bring back."

And when the messenger came to Solomon, he said, "Aid ye me with riches? But
what God hath given to me is better than what he hath given you: yet ye glory
in your gifts:

Return to them: for we will surely come to them with forces which they cannot
withstand, and we will drive them from their land humbled and contemptible."

Said he, "O nobles, which of you will bring me her throne before they come to
me, submitting? (Muslims)."

An Efreet7 of the Djinn said: "I will bring it thee ere thou risest from thy
place: I have power for this and am trusty."

And one who had the knowledge of Scripture said, "I will bring it to thee in
the twinkling of an eye."8 And when he saw it set before him, he said, "This
is of the favour of my Lord, to try me whether I will be thankful or
unthankful. And he who is thankful is thankful to his own behoof; and as for
him who is unthankful-truly my Lord is self-sufficient, bounteous!"

Said he, "Make her throne so that she know it not: we shall see whether she
hath or not guidance."

And when she came he said, "Is thy throne like this?" She said, "As though it
were the same." "And we," said he, "have had knowledge given us before her,
and have been Muslims."

But the gods she had worshipped instead of God had led her astray: for she
was of a people who believe not.

It was said to her,"Enter the Palace:" and when she saw it, she thought it a
lake of water, and bared her legs. He said, "It is a palace paved with
glass."

She said, "O my Lord! I have sinned against my own soul, and I resign myself,
with Solomon, to God the Lord of the Worlds."

And of old we sent to Themoud their brother Saleh, with "Serve ye God:"but
lo! they became two sets of disputants wrangling with each other.

He said, "O my people, why, if ye ask not pardon of God that ye may find
mercy, hasten ye on evil rather than good?"

They said,"We augur9 ill concerning thee and those who are with thee." He
said, "The ills of which ye augur10 depend on God. But ye are a people on
your trial."

And there were in the city nine persons who committed excesses in the land
and did not that which is right.

They said, "Swear ye to one another by God that we will surely fall on him
and on his family by night: then will be say to the avenger of blood, we
witnessed not the destruction of his family: and verily we speak the truth."

And they devised a device, and we devised a device, and they were not aware
of it-

And see what was the end of their device! We destroyed them and their whole
people:

And for their sin these their houses are empty ruins: Verily in this is a
sign to those who understand;

And we delivered those who believed and feared.

And Lot, when he said to his people, "What! proceed ye to such filthiness
with your eyes open?

What! come ye with lust unto men rather than to women? Surely ye are an
ignorant people."

And the answer of his people was but to say, "Cast out the family of Lot from
your city: they, forsooth, are men of purity!"

So we rescued him and his family: but as for his wife, we decreed her to be
of them that lingered:

And we rained a rain upon them, and fatal was the rain to those who had had
their warning.

SAY: Praise be to God and peace be on His servants whom He hath chosen! Is
God the more worthy or the gods they join with Him?

Is not He who hath made the Heavens and the Earth, and hath sent down rain to
you from Heaven, by which we cause the luxuriant groves to spring up! It is
not in your power to cause its trees to spring up! What! A god with God? Yet
they find equals for Him!

Is not He, who hath set the earth so firm, and hath made rivers in its midst,
and hath placed mountains upon it, and put a barrier between the two seas?11
What! a god with God? Yet the greater part of them have no knowledge!

Is not He the more worthy who answereth the oppressed when they cry to him,
and taketh off their ills, and maketh you to succeed your sires on the earth?
What! a god with God? How few bear these things in mind!

Is not He, who guideth you in the darkness of the land and of the sea, and
who sendeth forth the winds as the forerunners of His mercy? What! a god with
God? Far from God be what ye join with Him!

Is not He, who created a Being, then reneweth it, and who supplieth you out
of the Heaven and the Earth? What! a god with God? SAY: Bring forth your
proofs if you speak the truth.

SAY: None either in the Heavens or in the Earth knoweth the unseen but God.
And they know not

When they shall be raised.

-Yet they have attained to a knowledge of the life to come:12-yet are they in
doubt about it:-yet are they blind about it!

And the unbelievers say: "When we and our fathers have been dead shall we be
taken forth?

Of old have we been promised this, we and our sires of old it is but fables
of the ancients."

SAY: Go ye through the land, and see what hath been the end of the wicked.

And grieve not thou for them, nor be in distress at their devisings.

And they say, "When will this promise be made good, if ye speak true?"

SAY: Haply a part of what ye desire to be hastened may be close behind you.

And truly thy Lord is full of goodness towards men: But most of them are not
thankful.

And thy Lord knoweth well what their breasts enshroud, and what they bring to
light,

And there is no secret thing in the Heaven or on the Earth, but it is in the
clear Book.

Truly this Koran declareth to the children of Israel most things wherein they
disagree:

And it is certainly guidance and a mercy to the faithful.

Verily, by his wisdom will thy Lord decide between them: for He is the
Mighty, the Knowing.

Put thou then thy trust in God: for thou hast clear truth on thy side.13

Thou shalt not make the dead to hear; neither shalt thou make the deaf to
hear the call, when they turn away backward;

Neither art thou the guide of the blind out of their errors: none truly shalt
thou make to hear but those who believe our signs: and they are Muslims.

When the doom shall be ready to light upon them, we will cause a monster14 to
come forth to them out of the earth, and cry to them "Verily men have not
firmly believed our signs."

And on that day shall be gathered out of every nation a company of those who
have gainsaid our signs, in separate bands;

Till they come before God, who will say, "Treated ye my signs as impostures,
although ye embraced them not in your knowledge? or what is it that ye were
doing?

And doom shall light upon them for their evil deeds, and nought shall they
have to plead.

See they not that we have ordained the night that they may rest in it, and
the day with its gift of light? Of a truth herein are signs to people who
believe.

On that day there shall be a blast on the trumpet, and all that are in the
heavens, and all that the on the earth shall be terror-stricken, save him
whom God pleaseth to deliver; and all shall come to him in humble guise.

And thou shalt see the mountains, which thou thinkest so firm, pass away with
the passing of a cloud! 'Tis the work of God, who ordereth all things! of all
that ye do is He well aware.

To him who shall present himself with good works, shall be a reward beyond
their desert,15 and they shall be secure from the terror on that day;

And they who shall present themselves with evil shall be flung downward on
their faces into the fire. Shall ye be rewarded but as ye have wrought?

SAY: Specially am I commanded to worship the Lord of this land, which He hath
sanctified. All things are His: and I am commanded to be one of those who
surrender them to God (a Muslim)

And to recite the Koran: and whoever is rightly guided, assuredly will be
rightly guided to his own behoof.

And as to him who erreth, SAY, I truly am a warner only.And SAY, Praise be to
God! He will shew you His signs, and ye shall acknowledge them: and of what
ye do, thy Lord is not regardless.


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii., p. 32, n.

2 Not really leprous.

3 Lit. when our visible signs came to them.

4 This tradition may be derived from 1 Kings iv. 33. Comp. Geiger, p. 185.
The legend of Solomon's power over the Genii originates in a mistranslation
of Eccl. ii. 8. Comp. also for other points in this story Prov. vi. 6; 1
Kings x. 1-10.

5 "Demons obeyed him (Solomon) . . . and evil spirits were subjected to him."
Targ. 2. on Esther 1, 2. From the same source Muhammad has adopted, with
slight variations, the whole story of Solomon's intercourse with the Queen of
Saba. Comp. also Tr. Gittin, fol. 68, and Midr. Jalkut on 1 Kings vi. ch.
182.

6 Lit. unless ye bear me witness.

7 That is, malignant. "The efreets are generally believed to differ from the
other djinn in being very powerful and always malicious; but to be in other
respects of a similar nature" (Lane's Modern Egyptians, i. 285). "The ghosts
of dead persons are also called by this name" (ib. 289).

8 Or, before thy glance can be withdrawn from an object.

9 Lit. we have consulted the flight of birds: hence presage.

10 Lit. your bird, augury.

11 Comp. Sura [lxvi.] xxv. 55.

12 Lit. their knowledge attaineth to the next life.

13 Lit. art on clear truth.

14 Al Jassaca, the Spy.

15 Or, shall derive advantage from them.


SURA XVIII.-THE CAVE [LXIX.]

MECCA.-110 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

PRAISE be to God, who hath sent down the Book to his servant, and hath not
made it tortuous1

But direct; that it may warn of a grievous woe from him, and announce to the
faithful who do the things that are right, that a goodly reward, wherein they
shall abide for ever, awaiteth them;

And that it may warn those who say, "God hath begotten a Son."

No knowledge of this have either they or their fathers! A grievous saying to
come out of their mouths! They speak no other than a lie!

And haply, if they believe not in this new revelation, thou wilt slay
thyself, on their very footsteps, out of vexation.

Verily, we have made all that is on earth as its adornment, that we might
make trial who among mankind would excel in works:

But we are surely about to reduce all that is thereon to dust!

Hast thou reflected that the Inmates of THE CAVE and of Al Rakim2 were on our
wondrous signs?

When the youths betook them to the cave they said, "O our Lord! grant us
mercy from before thee, and order for us our affair aright."

Then struck we upon their ears with deafness in the cave for many a year:

Then we awaked them that we might know which of the two parties could best
reckon the space of their abiding.

We will relate to thee their tale with truth. They were youths who had
believed in their Lord, and in guidance had we increased them;

And we had made them stout of heart, when they stood up and said, "Our Lord
is Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth: we will call on no other God than
Him; for in that case we had said a thing outrageous.

These our people have taken other gods beside Him, though they bring no clear
proof for them; but, who more iniquitous than he who forgeth a lie of God?

So when ye shall have separated you from them and from that which they
worship beside God, then betake you to the cave: Your Lord will unfold his
mercy to you, and will order your affairs for you for the best."

And thou mightest have seen the sun when it arose, pass on the right of their
cave, and when it set, leave them on the left, while they were in its
spacious chamber. This is one of the signs of God. Guided indeed is he whom
God guideth; but for him whom He misleadeth, thou shalt by no means find a
patron, director.

And thou wouldst have deemed them awake,3 though they were sleeping: and we
turned them to the right and to the left. And in the entry lay their dog with
paws outstretched.4 Hadst thou come suddenly upon them, thou wouldst surely
have turned thy back on them in flight, and have been filled with fear at
them.

So we awaked them that they might question one another. Said one of them,
"How long have ye tarried here?" They said, "We have tarried a day or part of
day." They said, "Your Lord knoweth best how long ye have tarried: Send now
one of you with this your coin into the city, and let him mark who therein
hath purest food, and from him let him bring you a supply: and let him be
courteous, and not discover you to any one.

For they, if they find you out, will stone you or turn you back to their
faith, and in that case it will fare ill with you for ever."

And thus made we their adventure known to their fellow citizens, that they
might learn that the promise of God is true, and that as to "the Hour" there
is no doubt of its coming. When they disputed among themselves concerning
what had befallen them, some said, "Build a building over them; their Lord
knoweth best about them." Those who prevailed in the matter said, "A place of
worship will we surely raise over them."

Some say, "They were three; their dog the fourth:" others say, "Five; their
dog the sixth," guessing at the secret: others say, "Seven; and their dog the
eighth." SAY: My Lord best knoweth the number: none, save a few, shall know
them.

Therefore be clear in they discussions about them,5 and ask not any Christian
concerning them.

Say not thou of a thing, " I will surely do it to-morrow;" without , "If God
will."6 And when thou hast forgotten, call thy Lord to mind; and say, "Haply
my Lord will guide me, that I may come near to the truth of this story with
correctness."

And they tarried in their cave 300 years, and 9 years over.7

SAY: God best knoweth how long they tarried: With Him are the secrets of the
Heavens and of the Earth: Look thou and hearken unto Him alone.8 Man hath no
guardian but Him, and none may bear part in his judgments:-

And publish what hath been revealed to thee of the Book of thy Lord-none may
change his words,-and thou shalt find no refuge beside Him.

Be patient with those who call upon their Lord at morn and even, seeking his
face: and let not thine eyes be turned away from them in quest of the pomp of
this life;9 neither obey him10 whose heart we have made careless of the
remembrance of Us, and who followeth his own lusts, and whose ways are
unbridled.

And SAY: the truth is from your Lord: let him then who will, believe; and let
him who will, be an infidel. But for the offenders we have got ready the fire
whose smoke shall enwrap them: and if they implore help, helped shall they be
with water like molten brass which shall scald their Wretched the drink! and
an unhappy couch!

But as to those who have believed and done the things that are right,-Verily
we will not suffer the reward of him whose works were good, to perish!

For them, the gardens of Eden, under whose shades shall rivers flow: decked
shall they be therein with bracelets of gold, and green robes of silk and
rich brocade shall they wear, reclining them therein on thrones. Blissful the
reward! and a pleasant couch!11

And set forth to them as a parable two men; on one of whom we bestowed two
gardens of grape vines, and surrounded both with palm trees, and placed corn
fields between them: Each of the gardens did yield its fruit, and failed not
thereof at all:

And we caused a river to flow in their midst: And this man received his
fruit, and said, disputing with him, to his companion, "More have I than thou
of wealth, and my family is mightier."

And he went into his garden-to his own soul unjust. He said, "I do not think
that this will ever perish:

And I do not think that 'the Hour' will come: and even if I be taken back to
my Lord, I shall surely find a better than it in exchange."

His fellow said to him, disputing with him, "What ! hast thou no belief in
him who created thee of the dust, then of the germs of life,12 then fashioned
thee a perfect man?

But God is my Lord; and no other being will I associate with my Lord.

And why didst thou not say when thou enteredst thy garden, 'What God willeth!
There is no power but in God.' Though thou seest that I have less than thou
of wealth and children,

Yet haply my Lord may bestow on me better than thy garden, and may send his
bolts upon it out of Heaven, so that the next dawn shall find it barren dust;

Or its water become deep sunk, so that thou art unable to find it."

And his fruits were encompassed by destruction. Then began he to turn down
the palms of his hands at what he had spent on it; for its vines were falling
down on their trellises, and he said, "Oh that I had not joined any other god
to my Lord!"

And he had no host to help him instead of God, neither was he able to help
himself.

Protection in such a case is of God-the Truth: He is the best rewarder, and
He bringeth to the best issue.

And set before them a similitude of the present life. It is as water which we
send down from Heaven, and the herb of the Earth is mingled with it, and on
the morrow it becometh dry stubble which the winds scatter: for God hath
power over all things.

Wealth and children are the adornment of this present life: but good works,
which are lasting, are better in the sight of thy Lord as to recompense, and
better as to hope.

And call to mind the day when we will cause the mountains to pass away,13 and
thou shalt see the earth a levelled plain, and we will gather mankind
together, and not leave of them any one.

And they shall be set before thy Lord in ranks:-"Now are ye come unto us as
we created you at first: but ye thought that we should not make good to you
the promise."

And each shall have his book put into his hand: and thou shalt see the wicked
in alarm at that which is therein: and they shall say, "O woe to us! what
meaneth this Book? It leaveth neither small nor great unnoted down!" And they
shall find all that they have wrought present to them, and thy Lord will not
deal unjustly with any one.

When we said to the angels, "Prostrate yourselves before Adam," they all
prostrated them save Eblis, who was of the Djinn,14 and revolted from his
Lord's behest. behest.-What! will ye then take him and his offspring as
patrons rather than Me? and they your enemies? Sad exchange for the ungodly!

I made them not witnesses of the creation of the Heavens and of the Earth,
nor of their own creation, neither did I take seducers as my helpers.

On a certain day, God shall say, "Call ye on the companions ye joined with
me, deeming them to be gods:" and they shall call on them, but they shall not
answer them: then will we place a valley of perdition between them:

And the wicked shall see the fire, and shall have a foreboding that they
shall be flung into it, and they shall find no escape from it.

And now in this Koran we have presented to man similitudes of every kind:
but, at most things is man a caviller.

And what, now that guidance is come to them, letteth men from believing and
from asking forgiveness of their Lord-unless they wait till that the doom of
the ancients overtake them, or the chastisement come upon them in the sight
of the universe?

We send not our Sent Ones but to announce and to warn: but the infidels cavil
with vain words in order to refute the truth; and they treat my signs and
their own warnings with scorn.

But who is worse than he who when told of the signs of his Lord turneth him
away and forgetteth what in time past his hands have wrought? Truly we have
thrown veils over their hearts lest they should understand this Koran, and
into their ears a heaviness:

And if thou bid them to "the guidance" yet will they not even then be guided
ever.

The gracious one, full of compassion, is thy Lord! if he would have chastised
them for their demerits he would have hastened their chastisement. But they
have a time fixed for the accomplishment of our menaces: and beside God they
shall find no refuge.

And those cities did we destroy when they became impious; and of their coming
destruction we gave them warning.

Remember when Moses said to his servant, "I will not stop till I reach the
confluence of the two seas,15 or for years will I journey on."

But when they reached their confluence, they forgot their fish, and it took
its way in the sea at will.

And when they had passed on, said Moses to his servant, "Bring us our morning
meal; for now have we incurred weariness from this journey."

He said, "What thinkest thou? When we repaired to the rock for rest I forgot
the fish; and none but Satan made me forget it, so as not to mention it; and
it hath taken its way in the sea in a wondrous sort."

He said, "It is this we were in quest of."16 And they both went back
retracing their footsteps.

Then found they one of our servants to whom we had vouchsafed our mercy, and
whom we had instructed with our knowledge.

And Moses said to him, "Shall I follow thee that thou teach me, for guidance,
of that which thou too hast been taught?"

He said, "Verily, thou canst not have patience with me;

How canst thou be patient in matters whose meaning thou comprehendest not?"

He said, "Thou shalt find me patient if God please, nor will I disobey thy
bidding."

He said, "Then, if thou follow me, ask me not of aught until I have given
thee an account thereof."

So they both went on, till they embarked in a ship, and he-the unknown-staved
it in. "What!" said Moses, "hast thou staved it in that thou mayest drown its
crew? a strange thing now hast thou done!"

He said, "Did I not tell thee that thou couldst not have patience with me?"

He said, "Chide me not that I forgat, nor lay on me a hard command."

Then went they on till they met a youth, and he slew him. Said Moses, "Hast
thou slain him who is free from guilt of blood? Now hast thou wrought a
grievous thing!"

He said, "Did I not tell thee that thou couldst not have patience with me?"

Moses said, "If after this I ask thee aught, then let me be thy comrade no
longer; but now hast thou my excuse."

They went on till they came to the people of a city. Of this people they
asked food, but they refused them for guests. And they found in it a wall
that was about to fall, and he set it upright. Said Moses, "If thou hadst
wished, for this thou mightest have obtained pay."

He said, "This is the parting point between me and thee. But I will first
tell thee the meaning of that which thou couldst not await with patience.

"As to the vessel, it belonged to poor men who toiled upon the sea, and I was
minded to damage it, for in their rear was a king who seized every ship by
force.

As to the youth his parents were believers, and we feared lest he should
trouble them by error and infidelity.

And we desired that their Lord might give them in his place a child, better
than he in virtue, and nearer to filial piety.

And as to the wall, it belonged to two orphan youths in the city, and beneath
it was their treasure: and their father was a righteous man: and thy Lord
desired that they should reach the age of strength, and take forth their
treasure through the mercy of thy Lord. And not of mine own will have I done
this. This is the interpretation of that which thou couldst not bear with
patience."

They will ask thee of Dhoulkarnain [the two-horned17]. SAY: I will recite to
you an account of him.

We stablished his power upon the earth, and made for him a way to everything.
And a route he followed,

Until when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it to set in a miry
fount; and hard by he found a people.

We said, "O Dhoulkarnain! either chastise or treat them generously."

"The impious," said he, "will we surely chastise;" then shall he be taken
back to his Lord, and he will chastise him with a grievous chastisement.

But as to him who believeth and doeth that which is right, he shall have a
generous recompense, and we will lay on them our easy behests.

Then followed he a route,

Until when he reached the rising of the sun he found it to rise on a people
to whom we had given no shelter from it.

Thus it was.  And we had full knowledge of the forces that were with him.

Then followed he a route

Until he came between the two mountains, beneath which he found a people who
scarce understood a language.

They said, "O Dhoulkarnain! verily, Gog and Magog18 waste this land; shall we
then pay thee tribute, so thou build a rampart19 between us and them?"

He said, "Better than your tribute is the might wherewith my Lord hath
strengthened me; but help me strenuously, and I will set a barrier between
you and them.

Bring me blocks of iron,"-until when it filled the space between the mountain
sides-"Ply," said he, "your bellows,"-until when he had made it red with heat
(fire), he said,-"Bring me molten brass that I may pour upon it."

And Gog and Magog were not able to scale it, neither were they able to dig
through it.

"This," said he, "is a mercy from my Lord:

But when the promise of my Lord shall come to pass, he will turn it to dust;
and the promise of my Lord is true."

On that day we will let them dash like billows one over another; and there
shall be a blast on the trumpet, and we will gather them together in a body.

And we will set Hell on that day close before the infidels,

Whose eyes were veiled from my warning, and who had no power to hear.

What! do the infidels think that they can take my servants as their patrons,
beside Me? Verily, we have got Hell ready as the abode of the infidels.

SAY: Shall we tell you who they are that have lost their labour most?

Whose aim in the present life hath been mistaken, and who deem that what they
do is right?

They are those who believe not in the signs of the Lord, or that they shall
ever meet him. Vain, therefore, are their works; and no weight will we allow
them on the day of resurrection.

This shall be their reward-Hell.20 Because they were unbelievers, and treated
my signs and my Apostles with scorn.

But as for those who believe and do the things that are right, they shall
have the gardens of Paradise21 for their abode:

They shall remain therein for ever: they shall wish for no change from it.

SAY: Should the sea become ink, to write the words of my Lord, the sea would
surely fail ere the words of my Lord would fail, though we brought its like
in aid.

SAY: In sooth I am only a man like you. It hath been revealed to me that your
God is one only God: let him then who hopeth to meet his Lord work a
righteous work: nor let him give any other creature a share in the worship of
his Lord.


_______________________

1 Lit. hath not put crookedness into it.

2 The valley, or mountain, in which the Cave of the Seven Sleepers was
situated. Comp. Fundgreiben des Orients, iii. 347-381. Gibbon's Decline and
Fall, ch. xxxiii., especially the concluding sentences.

3 Because they slept with their eyes open. Beidh.

4 The Muhammadans believe that this dog will be admitted into Paradise. One
of its traditional names is Katmir, a word whose letters, it should be
observed, are with one exception identical with Rakim.

5 Lit. dispute not about them unless with clear disputation.

6 Muhammad had omitted to use the qualifying phrase when, in reply to the
Jews who asked for the History of the Seven Sleepers, he simply promised to
give it on the morrow; hence, this verse. Comp. James iv. 13-15.

7 They entered the cavern under Decius and awoke in the time of Theodosius,
according to the tradition; which cannot be reconciled with the number of
years given in the text.

8 Thus Ullm. But the words may be taken with Beidh. and Sale, as ironical.
Make thou him to see and hear.

9 Said to have been promulgated at Medina. N√∂ld. p. 106

10 Omaya Ibn Chalf, who advised Muhammad to cast off all his poorer
followers, out of respect to the Koreisch.

11 It is probable that this and the numerous similar descriptions of the
enjoyments in Paradise are based upon Muhammad's knowledge, or possibly
personal observation, of the luxurious habits of the Persians, to whom many
Arabian tribes owed allegiance, and with whom they had mercantile
transactions by means of caravans. The word Paradise, the names of cups and
brocade in Sura lvi. pp. 66, 67, and the word sundus in this passage, are all
Persian.

12 Lit ex spermate.

13 Comp. Isai. xl. 4, etc.

14 Muhammad appears, according to this text, to have considered Eblis not
only as the father of the Djinn, but as one of their number. The truth
appears to be that Muhammad derived his doctrines of the Genii from the
Persian and Indian mythology, and attempted to identify them with the Satan
and demons of the Semitic races. Both the Satans and Djinn represent in the
Koran the principle of Evil. See Sura [xci.] ii. 32, n.

15 The sea of Greece and the sea of Persia. But as no literal interpretation
of the passage seems satisfactory, the Commentators have devised a spiritual
or metaphorical one, and explain it of the two oceans of natural and
supernatural knowledge. There is no trace of this legend in the Rabbinic
writings.

16 The loss of our fish is a sign to us of our finding him whom we seek,
namely, El-Khidr, or El-Khadir, the reputed vizier of Dhoulkarnain, and said
to have drunk of the fountain of life, by virtue of which he still lives, and
will live till the day of judgment. He is also said to appear, clad in green
robes, to Muslims in distress, whence his name. Perhaps the name Khidr is
formed from Jethro.

17 Probably Alexander the Great-so called from his expeditions to the East
and West. He seems to be regarded in this passage as invested with a divine
commission for the extirpation of impiety and idolatry. Comp. Dan. viii. and
Tr. Tanith, fol. 32. Hottinger Bibl. Orient. 109.

18 Ar. Yadjoudj and Madjoudj-the barbarous people of E. Asia. See Ibn
Batoutah's Travels, iv. p. 274 (Par.ed.)

19 This rampart has been identified with fortifications which extended from
the W. shore of the Caspian Sea to the Pontus Euxinus, made, as it is said,
by Alexander, and repaired by Yezdegird II. Caussin de Perceval, vol.i.p. 66.
See Sura [lxv.] xxi. 96

20 The form of this word in the Arabic, with the h in the second syllable and
the final m, shews that the word was borrowed from the Hebrew, and not from
the Greek or Syriac.

21 Observe in this expression the same admixture of the Semitic and Indo-
Persian elements as was noticed above in the identification of Satans and
Djinn, verse 48.


SURA XXXII.-ADORATION [LXX.]

MECCA.-30 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

ELIF. LAM. MIM.1 This Book is without a doubt a Revelation sent down from the
Lord of the Worlds.

Will they say, He hath forged it? Nay, it is the truth from thy Lord that
thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner hath come before thee, that haply
they may be guided.

God it is who hath created the Heavens and the Earth and all that is between
them in six days; then ascended his throne. Save Him ye have no patron, and
none to plead for you. Will ye not then reflect?

From the Heaven to the Earth He governeth all things: hereafter shall they
come up to him on a day whose length shall be a thousand of such years as ye
reckon.2

This is He who knoweth the unseen and the seen; the Mighty, the Merciful,

Who hath made everything which he hath created most good; and began the
creation of man with clay;

Then ordained his progeny from germs of life,3 from sorry water:

Then shaped him, and breathed of His Spirit into him, and gave you hearing
and seeing and hearts: what little thanks do ye return!

And they say, "What! when we shall have lain hidden in the earth, shall we
become a new creation?"

Yea, they deny that they shall meet their Lord.

SAY: The angel of death who is charged with you shall cause you to die: then
shall ye be returned to your Lord.

Couldst thou but see when the guilty shall droop their heads before their
Lord, and cry, "O our Lord! we have seen and we have heard: return us then to
life: we will do that which is right. Verily we believe firmly!"

(Had we pleased we had certainly given to every soul its guidance. But true
shall be the word which hath gone forth from me-I will surely fill hell with
Djinn and men together.)

"Taste then the recompense of your having forgotten the meeting with this
your day. We, too, we have forgotten you: taste then an eternal punishment
for that which ye have wrought."

They only believe in our signs, who, when mention is made of them, fall down
in ADORATION, and celebrate the praise of their Lord, and are not puffed up
with disdain:

Who, as they raise them4 from their couches, call on their Lord with fear and
desire, and give alms of that with which we have supplied them.

No soul knoweth what joy of the eyes is reserved for the good in recompense
of their works.

Shall he then who is a believer be as he who sinneth grossly? they shall not
be held alike.

As to those who believe and do that which is right, they shall have gardens
of eternal abode as the meed of their works:

But as for those who grossly sin, their abode shall be the fire: so oft as
they shall desire to escape out of it, back shall they be turned into it. And
it shall be said to them, Taste ye the torment of the fire, which ye treated
as a lie.

And we will surely cause them to taste a punishment yet nearer at hand,
besides the greater punishment, that haply they may turn to us in penitence.

Who acteth worse than he who is warned by the signs of his Lord, then turneth
away from them? We will surely take vengeance on the guilty ones.

We heretofore gave the Book of the law to Moses: have thou no doubt as to our
meeting with him:5 and we appointed it for the guidance of the children of
Israel.

And we appointed Im√¢ms from among them who should guide after our command
when they had themselves endured with constancy, and had firmly believed in
our signs.

Now thy Lord! He will decide between them on the day of resurrection as to
the subject of their disputes.

Is it not notorious to them how many generations, through whose abodes they
walk, we have destroyed before them? Truly herein are sings: will they not
then hear?

See they not how we drive the rain to some parched land and thereby bring
forth corn of which their cattle and themselves do eat? Will they not then
behold?

They say, "When will this decision take place? Tell us, if ye are men of
truth?"

SAY: On the day of that decision, the faith of infidels shall not avail them,
and they shall have no further respite.

Stand aloof from them then, and wait thou, for they too wait.6


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. 1, p. 32.

2 Comp. Sura [cvii.] xxii. 46, and Ps. xc. 4, which is taken literally by
many of the Talmudists. Comp. e.g. Sanhed. 96, 2.

3 Lit. ex spermate genitali.

4 Lit. their sides are raised.

5 N√∂ldeke thinks that the word for meeting is used here in the same sense as
in v. 10 above and Sura [lxxi.] xli. 54, and that the clause does not belong
to this verse, p. 108, n.

6 Wait thou for their punishment as they wait for thy downfall.


SURA1 XLI.-THE MADE PLAIN [LXXI.]

MECCA.-54 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HA. MIM.2 A Revelation from the Compassionate, the Merciful!

A Book whose verses (signs) are MADE PLAIN-an Arabic Koran, for men of
knowledge;

Announcer of glad tidings and charged with warnings! But most of them
withdraw and hearken not:

And they say, "Our hearts are under shelter from thy teachings, and in our
ears is a deafness, and between us and thee there is a veil. Act as thou
thinkest right: we verily shall act as we think right."

SAY: I am only a man like you.3 It is revealed to me that your God is one
God: go straight then to Him, and implore his pardon. And woe to those who
join gods with God;

Who pay not the alms of obligation, and in the life to come believe not!

But they who believe and do the things that are right shall receive a
perfect4 recompense.

SAY: Do ye indeed disbelieve in Him who in two days created the earth? and do
ye assign Him peers? The Lord of the worlds is He!

And he hath placed on the earth the firm mountains which tower above it; and
He hath blessed it, and distributed food throughout it, for the cravings of
all alike, in four days:

Then He applied himself to the Heaven, which then was but smoke: and to it
and to the Earth He said, "Come ye, whether in obedience or against your
will?" and they both said, "We come obedient."

And He made them seven heavens in two days, and in each heaven made known its
office: And we furnished the lower heaven with lights and guardian angels.
This, the disposition of the Almighty, the All-knowing.

If they turn away, then SAY: I warn you of a tempest, like the tempest of Ad
and Themoud!

When the apostles came to them on every side,5 saying, "Worship none but
God," they said, "Had our Lord been pleased to send down, He had surely sent
down angels; and in sooth, your message we do not believe."

As to Ad, they bore them proudly and unjustly in the land, and said, "Who
more mighty than we in prowess?" Saw they not that God their creator was
mightier than they in prowess? And they rejected our signs.

Therefore on ill-omened days did we send against them an impetuous blast that
we might make them taste the chastisement of shame in this world:-but more
shameful shall be the chastisement of the life to come; and they shall not be
protected.

And as to Themoud, we had vouchsafed them guidance; but to guidance did they
prefer blindness; wherefore the tempest of a shameful punishment overtook
them for their doings:

But we rescued the believing and the God-fearing:

And warn of the day when the enemies of God shall be gathered6 unto the fire
urged on in bands:

Until when they reach it, their ears and their eyes and their skins shall
bear witness against them of their deeds:

And they shall say to their skins, "Why witness ye against us?" They shall
say, "God, who giveth a voice to all things, hath given us a voice: He
created you at first, and to Him are ye brought back.

And ye did not hide yourselves so that neither your ears nor your eyes nor
your skins should witness against you: but ye thought that God knew not many
a thing that ye did!

And this your thought which ye did think of your Lord hath ruined you, so
that ye are become of those who perish."

And be they patient, still the fire shall be their abode: or if they beg for
favour, yet shall they not be of favoured.

And we will appoint Satans as their fast companions; for it was they who made
their present and future state seem fair and right to them; and the sentence
passed on the peoples of Djinn and men who flourished before them hath become
their due, and they shall perish.

Yet the unbelievers say, "Hearken not to this Koran, but keep up a talking,
that ye may overpower the voice of the reader."

Surely therefore will we cause the unbelievers to taste a terrible
punishment;

And recompense them according to the worst of their actions.

This the reward of the enemies of God,-the Fire! it shall be their eternal
abode, in requital for their gainsaying our signs.

And they who believed not shall say, "O our Lord! shew us those of the Djinn
and men who led us astray: both of them will we put under out feet, that they
may be of the humbled."

But as for those who say, "Our Lord is God;" and who go straight to Him,7
angels shall descend to them and say, "Fear ye not, neither be ye grieved,
but rejoice ye in the paradise which ye have been promised.

We are your guardians in this life and in the next: your's therein shall be
your soul's desire, and your's therein whatever ye shall ask for,

The hospitality of a Gracious, a Merciful One."

And who speaketh fairer than he who biddeth to God and doth the thing that is
right, and saith, "I for my part am of the Muslims"?

Moreover, good and evil are not to be treated as the same thing. Turn away
evil by what is better, and lo! he between whom and thyself was enmity, shall
be as though he were a warm friend.

But none attain to this save men steadfast in patience, and none attain to it
except the most highly favoured.8

And if an enticement from Satan entice thee, then take refuge in God, for He
is the Hearing, the Knowing.

And among his signs are the night, and the day, and the sun, and the moon.
Bend not in adoration to the sun or the moon, but bend in adoration before
God who created them both, if ye would serve Him.

But if they are too proud for this, yet they who are with thy Lord do
celebrate His praises night and day,9 and cease not.

And among His signs is this, that thou seest the earth drooping: but, when we
send down the rain upon it, it is stirred and swelleth; verily He who giveth
it life, will surely give life to the dead; for His might extendeth over all
things.10

They truly who with obloquy disown our signs are not hidden from us. Is he
then who shall be cast into the fire, or he who shall come forth secure on
the day of resurrection, in the better position? Do what ye will: but His eye
is on all your doings.

Verily, they who believe not in "the warning," after it hath come to them . .
. and yet the Koran is a glorious book!

Falsehood, from whatever side it cometh, shall not come night it;11 it is a
missive down from the Wise, the Praiseworthy.

Nothing hath been said to thee which hath not been said of old to apostles
before thee. Verily with thy Lord is forgiveness, and with Him is terrible
retribution.

Had we made it a Koran in a foreign tongue, they had surely said, "Unless its
signs be made clear . . . !12 What! in a foreign tongue? and the people
Arabian?" SAY: It is to those who believe a guide and a medicine;13 but as to
those who believe not, there is a thickness in their ears, and to them it is
a blindness: they are like those who are called to from afar.

Of old we gave the Book to Moses, and disputes arose about it: and if a
decree of respite from thy Lord had gone before, there would surely have been
a decision between them: for great were their doubts and questionings about
it.14

He who doth right-it is for himself:15 and he who doth evil-it is for
himself: and thy Lord will not deal unfairly with his servants.

With Him alone16 is the knowledge of "the Hour." No fruit cometh forth from
its coverings, neither doth any female conceive, nor is she delivered, but
with His knowledge. And on that day He shall call men to Him, saying, "Where
are the companions ye gave me?" They shall say, "We own to thee, there is no
one of us can witness for them."

And what they erst called on shall pass away from them, and they shall
perceive that there will be no escape for them.

Man ceaseth not to pray for good: but if evil betide him he despondeth,
despairing.

And if we cause him to taste our mercy after affliction hath touched him, he
is sure to say, "This is my due: and I take no thought of the Hour of
Resurrection: and if I be brought back to my Lord, I shall indeed attain with
Him my highest good." But we will then certainly declare their doings to the
Infidels, and cause them to taste a stern punishment.

When we are gracious to man, he withdraweth and turneth him aside: but when
evil toucheth him, he is a man of long prayers.

SAY: What think ye? If this Book be from God and ye believe it not, who will
have gone further astray than he who is at a distance from it?

We will shew them our signs in different countries and among themselves,
until it become plain to them that it is the truth. Is it not enough for thee
that thy Lord is witness of all things?

Are they not in doubt as to the meeting with their Lord? But doth he not
encompass all things?


_______________________

1 In some MSS. this Sura is entitled Adoration. Thus Beidh. According to His.
186, comp. Caussin 1, 375 f., Muhammad's aim in this Sura was the conversion
of a noble Meccan, Utba ben Rabia, to Islam. The precise year is uncertain.

2 See Sura lxviii. 1, p. 32.

3 Thus SS. Paul and Barnabas, Acts xiv. 15.

4 Or, never failing.

5 Lit. from before them and from behind them.

6 See Sura [lx.] xxxvi. 64, n.

7 Comp. Sura [lxxxviii.] xlvi. 12.

8 Lit. the possessor of great good fortune.

9 Comp. Rev. iv. 8 in the original.

10 Thus Tr. Taanith (init.).

11 Lit. vanity shall not come to it from before it, or from behind it.

12 We will not receive it. The literal rendering of the following words is
what! foreign and Arabian?

13 Comp. Sura [lxvii.] xvii. 83, 84.

14 Lit. verily they were in suspicious doubting about it.

15 Lit. for his soul. See next Sura, v. 14.

16 Lit. to Him is referred.


SURA XLV.-THE KNEELING [LXXII.]

MECCA.-36 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HA. MIM.1 This Book is sent down2 from God, the Mighty, the Wise!

Assuredly in the Heavens and the Earth are signs for those who believe:

And in your own creation, and in the beasts which are scattered abroad are
signs to the firm in faith:

And in the succession of night and day, and in the supply which God sendeth
down from the Heaven whereby He giveth life to the earth when dead, and in
the change of the winds, are signs for a people of discernment.

Such are the signs of God: with truth do we recite them to thee. But in what
teaching will they believe, if they reject3 God and his signs?

Woe to every lying sinner,

Who heareth the signs of God recited to him, and then, as though he heard
them not, persisteth in proud disdain! Apprise him of an afflictive
punishment.

And when he becometh acquainted with any of our signs he turneth them into
ridicule. These! a shameful punishment for them!

Hell is behind them! and neither their gains nor the lords whom they have
adopted beside God shall avail them in the least: and theirs, a great
punishment!

This is "Guidance:" and for those who disbelieve the signs of their Lord is
the punishment of an afflictive torment.

It is God who hath subjected the sea to you that the ships may traverse it at
his bidding, and that ye may go in quest of the gifts of his bounty, and that
ye may be thankful.

And he hath subjected to you all that is in the Heavens and all that is on
the Earth: all is from him. Verily, herein are signs for those who reflect.

Tell the believers to pardon those who hope not for the days of God4 in which
He purposeth to reward men according to their deeds.

He who doth that which is right, doth it to his own behoof, and whoso doth
evil, doth it to his own hurt. Hereafter, to your Lord shall ye be brought
back.

To the children of Israel gave we of old the Book and the Wisdom, and the
gift of Prophecy, and we supplied them with good things, and privileged them
above all peoples:

And we gave them clear sanctions for our behests: neither did they differ,
through mutual envy, till after they had become possessed of knowledge; but
thy Lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection, as to the
subject of their disputes.

Afterwards we set thee over our divine law:5 follow it then: and follow not
the wishes of those who have no knowledge,

For against God shall they avail thee nothing. And in sooth, the doers of
evil are one another's patrons; but the patron of them that fear Him is God
himself.

This Book hath insight for mankind, and a Guidance and Mercy to a people who
are firm in faith.

Deem they whose gettings are only evil, that we will deal with them as with
those who believe and work righteousness, so that their lives and deaths
shall be alike? Ill do they judge.

In all truth hath God created the Heavens and the Earth, that he may reward
every one as he shall have wrought; and they shall not be wronged.

What thinkest thou? He who hath made a God of his passions, and whom God
causeth wilfully to err, and whose ears and whose heart he hath sealed up,
and over whose sight he hath placed a veil-who, after his rejection by God,
shall guide such a one? Will ye not then be warned?

And they say, "There is only this our present life: we die and we live, and
nought but time destroyeth us." But in this they have no knowledge: it is
merely their own conceit.

And when our clear signs are recited to them, their only argument is to say,
"Bring back our fathers, if ye speak the truth."

Say: God giveth you life, then causeth you to die: then will He assemble you
on the day of resurrection: there is no doubt of it: but most men have not
this knowledge.

And God's is the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth; and on the day when
the Hour shall arrive, on that day shall the despisers6 perish.

And thou shalt see every nation KNEELING: to its own book shall every nation
be summoned:-¬îThis day shall ye be repaid as ye have wrought.

This our Book will speak of you with truth: therein have we written down
whatever ye have done."

As to those who have believed and wrought righteously, into his mercy shall
their Lord cause them to enter. This shall be undoubted bliss!

But as to the Infidels-"Were not my signs recited to you? but ye proudly
scorned them, and became a sinful people."

And when it was said, "Verily the Promise of God is truth; and as to the
Hour, there is no doubt of it;" ye said, "We know not what the hour is-we
conceive it a mere conceit,-we have no assurance of it."

And the evils they have wrought shall rise up into their view, and that at
which they mocked shall hem them in on every side.

And it shall be said to them, "This day will we forget you as ye forgat your
meeting with us this day, and your abode shall be the fire, and none shall
there be to succour you:-

This, because ye received the signs of God with mockery, and this present
life deceived you." On that day therefore they shall not come out from it;
and they shall not be asked to win the favour of God.

Praise then be to God, Lord of the Heavens and Lord of the Earth; the Lord of
the worlds!

And His be the greatness in the Heavens and on the Earth; for He is the
Mighty, the Wise!


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. p. 32.

2 Lit. the sending down, i.e. the revelation of the Book.

3 Lit. after God.

4 That is, the days of victory. In Scripture phrase, "the days of the right
hand of the Most High."

5 The Arabic amri may be rendered either command or business, i.e. of
religion.

6 Lit. the makers vain, i.e. vanitatis arguentes alcoranum. Mar.


SURA XVI.-THE BEE [LXXIII.]

MECCA.-128 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

THE doom of God cometh to pass. Then hasten it not. Glory be to Him! High let
Him be exalted above the gods whom they join with Him!

By his own behest will He cause the angels to descend with the Spirit on whom
he pleaseth among his servants, bidding them, "Warn that there is no God but
me; therefore fear me."

He hath created the Heavens and the Earth to set forth his truth;1 high let
Him be exalted above the gods they join with Him!

Man hath He created from a moist germ;2 yet lo! man is an open caviller.

And the cattle! for you hath He created them: in them ye have warm garments
and gainful uses; and of them ye eat:

And they beseem you well3 when ye fetch them home and when ye drive them
forth to pasture:

And they carry your burdens to lands which ye could not else reach but with
travail of soul: truly your Lord is full of goodness, and merciful:

And He hath given you horses, mules, and asses, that ye may ride them, and
for your ornament: and things of which ye have no knowledge hath he created.

Of God it is to point out "the Way." Some turn aside from it: but had He
pleased, He had guided you all aright.

It is He who sendeth down rain out of Heaven: from it is your drink; and from
it are the plants by which ye pasture.

By it He causeth the corn, and the olives, and the palm-trees, and the grapes
to spring forth for you, and all kinds of fruits: verily, in this are signs
for those who ponder.

And He hath subjected to you the night and the day; the sun and the moon and
the stars too are subjected to you by his behest; verily, in this are signs
for those who understand:

And all of varied hues that He hath created for you over the earth: verily,
in this are signs for those who remember.

And He it is who hath subjected the sea to you, that ye may eat of its fresh
fish, and take forth from it ornaments to wear-thou seest the ships ploughing
its billows-and that ye may go in quest of his bounties, and that ye might
give thanks.

And He hath thrown firm mountains on the earth, least it move with you; and
rivers and paths for your guidance,

And way marks. By the stars too are men guided.

Shall He then who hath created be as he who hath not created? Will ye not
consider?

And if ye would reckon up the favours of God, ye could not count them. Aye!
God is right Gracious, Merciful!

And God knoweth what ye conceal, and what ye bring to light,

While the gods whom they call on beside God, create nothing, but are
themselves created:

Dead are they, lifeless! and they know not

When they shall be raised!

Your God is the one God: and they who believe not in a future life, have
hearts given to denial, and are men of pride:-

Beyond a doubt God knoweth what they conceal and what they manifest:-

He truly loveth not the men of pride.

For when it is said to them, "What is this your Lord hath sent down?" they
say, "Fables of the ancients,"-

That on the day of resurrection they may bear their own entire burden, and
the burden of those whom they, in their ignorance, misled. Shall it not be a
grievous burden for them?

They who were before them did plot of old. But God attacked their building at
its foundation the roof fell on them from above; and, whence they looked not
for it, punishment overtook them:4

On the day of resurrection, too, will He shame them. He will say, "Where are
the gods ye associated with me, the subjects of your disputes?" They to whom
"the knowledge" hath been given will say, Verily, this day shall shame and
evil fall upon the infidels.

The sinners against their own souls whom the angels shall cause to die will
proffer the submission, "No evil have we done." Nay! God knoweth what ye have
wrought:

Enter ye therefore the gates of Hell to remain therein for ever: and horrid
the abiding place of the haughty ones!

But to those who have feared God it shall be said, "What is this that your
Lord hath awarded?" They shall say, "That which is best. To those who do
good, a good reward in this present world; but better the mansion of the
next, and right pleasant the abode of the God-fearing!"

Gardens of Eden into which they shall enter; rivers shall flow beneath their
shades; all they wish for shall they find therein! Thus God rewardeth those
who fear Him;

To whom, as righteous persons, the angels shall say, when they receive their
souls, "Peace be on you! Enter Paradise as the meed of your labours."

What can the infidels expect but that the angels of death come upon them, or
that a sentence of thy Lord take effect? Thus did they who flourished before
them. God was not unjust to them, but to their ownselves were they unjust;

And the ill which they had done recoiled upon them, and that which they had
scoffed at encompassed them round about.

They who have joined other gods with God say, "Had He pleased, neither we nor
our fathers had worshipped aught but him; nor should we, apart from him, have
forbidden aught." Thus acted they who were before them. Yet is the duty of
the apostles other than public preaching?

And to every people have we sent an apostle saying:-Worship God and turn away
from Taghout.5 Some of them there were whom God guided, and there were others
decreed to err. But go through the land and see what hath been the end of
those who treated my apostles as liars!

If thou art anxious for their guidance, know that God will not guide him whom
He would lead astray, neither shall they have any helpers.

And they swear by God with their most sacred oath that "God will never raise
him who once is dead." Nay, but on Him is a promise binding, though most men
know it not,-

That He may clear up to them the subject of their disputes, and that the
infidels may know that they are liars.

Our word to a thing when we will it, is but to say, "Be," and it is.6

And as to those who when oppressed have fled their country for the sake of
God, we will surely provide them a goodly abode in this world, but greater
the reward of the next life, did they but know it

They who bear ills with patience and put their trust in the Lord!

None have we sent before thee but men inspired ask of those who have Books of
Monition,7 if ye know it not-

With proofs of their mission and Scriptures: and to thee have we sent down
this Book of Monition that thou mayest make clear to men what hath been sent
down to them, and that they may ponder it.

What! Are they then who have plotted mischiefs, sure that God will not cause
the earth to cleave under them? or that a chastisement will not come upon
them whence they looked not for it?

Or that He will not seize upon them in their comings and goings, while they
shall not be able to resist him?

Or that he will not seize them with some slowly wasting scourge? But verily
your Lord is Good, Gracious.

Have they not seen how everything which God hath created turneth its shadow
right and left, prostrating itself before God in all abasement?

And all in the Heavens and all on the Earth, each thing that moveth, and the
very angels, prostrate them in adoration before God, and are free from pride;

They fear their Lord who is above them, and do what they are bidden:

For God hath said, "Take not to yourselves two gods, for He is one God: me,
therefore! yea, me revere!

All in the Heavens and in the Earth is His! His due unceasing service! Will
ye then fear any other than God?

And all your blessings are assuredly from God: then, when trouble befalleth
you, to Him ye turn for help:

Then when He relieveth you of the trouble, lo! some of you join associates
with your Lord:-

To prove how thankless are they for our gifts! Enjoy yourselves then: but in
the end ye shall know the truth.

And for idols, of which they know nothing, they set apart a share of our
bounties! By God ye shall be called to account for your devices!

And they ascribe daughters unto God! Glory be to Him! But they desire them
not for themselves:8

For when the birth of a daughter is announced to any one of them, dark
shadows settle on his face, and he is sad:

He hideth him from the people because of the ill tidings: shall he keep it
with disgrace or bury it in the dust?9 Are not their judgments wrong?

To whatever is evil may they be likened who believe not in a future life;10
but God is to be likened to whatever is loftiest: for He is the Mighty, the
Wise.

Should God punish men for their perverse doings, he would not leave on earth
a moving thing! but to an appointed term doth He respite them; and when their
term is come, they shall not delay or advance it an hour.

Yet what they loathe themselves do they assign to God; and their tongues
utter the lie, that theirs shall be a goodly lot. But beyond a doubt is it
that the fire awaiteth them, and that they shall be the first sent into it.

By God we have sent Apostles to nations before thee, but Satan prepared their
work for them, and this day is he their liege; and a woeful punishment doth
await them.

And we have sent down the Book to thee only, that thou mightest clear up to
them the subject of their wranglings, and as a guidance and a mercy to those
who believe.

And God sendeth down water from Heaven, and by it giveth life to the Earth
after it hath been dead: verily, in this is a sign to those who hearken.

Ye have also teaching from the cattle. We give you drink of the pure milk,
between dregs and blood, which is in their bellies; the pleasant beverage of
them that quaff it.

And among fruits ye have the palm and the vine, from which ye get wine and
healthful nutriment: in this, verily, are signs for those who reflect.

And thy Lord hath taught the BEE, saying: "Provide thee houses in the
mountains, and in the trees, and in the hives which men do build thee:

Feed, moreover, on every kind of fruit, and walk the beaten paths of thy
Lord." From its belly cometh forth a fluid of varying hues,11 which yieldeth
medicine to man. Verily in this is a sign for those who consider.

And God hath created you; by and bye will he take you to himself; and some
among you will he carry on to abject old age, when all that once was known is
known no longer. Aye, God is Knowing, Powerful.

And God hath abounded to some of you more than to others in the supplies of
life; yet they to whom He hath abounded, impart not thereof to the slaves
whom their right hands possess, so that they may share alike. What! will they
deny, then, that these boons are from God?

God, too, hath given you wives of your own race, and from your wives hath He
given you sons and grandsons, and with good things hath he supplied you.
What, will they then believe in vain idols? For God's boons they are
ungrateful!

And they worship beside God those who neither out of the Heavens or Earth can
provide them a particle of food, and have no power in themselves!

Make no comparisons, therefore, with God.12 Verily, God hath knowledge, but
ye have not.

God maketh comparison between a slave13 the property of his lord, who hath no
power over anything, and a free man whom we have ourselves supplies, and who
giveth alms therefrom both in secret and openly. Shall they be held equal?
No: praise be to God! But most men know it not.

God setteth forth also a comparison between two men, one of whom is dumb from
his birth, and hath no power over anything, and is a burden to his lord: send
him where he will, he cometh not back with success. Shall he and the man who
enjoineth what is just, and keepeth in the straight path, be held equal?

God's are the secrets of the Heavens and of the Earth! and the business of
the last hour will be but as the twinkling of an eye, or even less. Yes! for
all things is God Potent.

God hath brought you out of your mothers' wombs devoid of all knowledge; but
hath given you hearing, and sight, and heart, that haply ye might render
thanks.

Have they never looked up at the birds subjected to Him in Heaven's vault?
None holdeth them in hand but God! In this are signs for those who believe.

And God hath given you tents to dwell in: and He hath given you the skins of
beasts for tents, that ye may find them light when ye shift your quarters, or
when ye halt; and from their wool and soft fur and hair, hath He supplied you
with furniture and goods for temporary use.

And from the things which He hath created, hath God provided shade for you,
and hath given you the mountains for places of shelter, and hath given you
garments to defend you from the heat, and garments to defend you in your
wars. Thus doth He fill up the measure of His goodness towards you, that you
may resign yourselves to Him.

But if they turn their backs, still thy office is only plain spoken
preaching.

They own the goodness of God-then they disown it-and most of them are
infidels.

But one day, we will raise up a witness out of every nation: them shall the
infidels have no permission to make excuses, and they shall find no favour.

And when they who have acted thus wrongly shall behold their torment, it
shall not be made light to them, nor will God deign to look upon them.

And when they who had joined associates with God shall see those their
associate-gods, they shall say, "O our Lord! these are our associate-gods
whom we called upon beside Thee." But they shall retort on them, "Verily, ye
are liars."

And on that day shall they proffer submission to God; and the deities of
their own invention shall vanish from them.

As for those who were infidels and turned others aside from the way of God,
to them we will add punishment on punishment for their corrupt doings.

And one day we will summon up in every people a witness against them from
among themselves; and we will bring thee up as a witness against these
Meccans: for to thee have we sent down the Book which cleareth up everything,
a guidance, and mercy, and glad tidings to those who resign themselves to God
(to Muslims).

Verily, God enjoineth justice and the doing of good and gifts to kindred, and
he forbiddeth wickedness and wrong and oppression. He warneth you that haply
ye may be mindful.

Be faithful in the covenant of God when ye have covenanted, and break not
your oaths after ye have pledged them: for now have ye made God to stand
surety for you. Verily, God hath knowledge of what ye do.

And, because you are a more numerous people than some other people, be not
like her who unravelleth the thread which she had strongly spun, by taking
your oaths with mutual perfidy. God is making trial of you in this: and in
the day of resurrection he will assuredly clear up to you that concerning
which ye are now at variance.

Had God pleased, He could have made you one people: but He causeth whom He
will to err, and whom He will He guideth: and ye shall assuredly be called to
account for your doings.

Therefore take not your oaths with mutual fraud, lest your foot slip after it
hath been firmly fixed, and ye taste of evil because ye have turned others
aside from the way of God, and great be your punishment.

And barter not the covenant of God for a mean price; for with God is that
which is better for you, if ye do but understand.

All that is with you passeth away, but that which is with God abideth. With a
reward meet for their best deeds will we surely recompense those who have
patiently endured.

Whoso doeth that which is right, whether male or female, if a believer, him
will we surely quicken to a happy life, and recompense them with a reward
meet for their best deeds.

When thou readest the Koran, have recourse to God for help against Satan the
stoned,14

For no power hath he over those who believe, and put their trust in their
Lord,

But only hath he power over those who turn away from God, and join other
deities with Him.

And when we change one (sign) verse for another, and God knoweth best what He
revealeth, they say, "Thou art only a fabricator." Nay! but most of them have
no knowledge.

SAY: The Holy Spirit15 hath brought it down with truth from thy Lord, that He
may stablish those who have believed, and as guidance and glad tidings to the
Muslims.

We also know that they say, "Surely a certain person teacheth him." But the
tongue of him at whom they hint is foreign,16 while this Koran is in the
plain Arabic.

As for those who believe not in the signs of God, God will not guide them,
and a sore torment doth await them.

Surely they invent a lie who believe not in the signs of God-and they are the
liars.

Whoso, after he hath believed in God denieth him, if he were forced to it and
if his heart remain steadfast in the faith, shall be guiltless:17 but whoso
openeth his breast to infidelity-on such shall be wrath from God, and a
severe punishment awaiteth them.

This, because they have loved this present life beyond the next, and because
God guideth not the unbelievers!

These are they whose hearts and ears and eyes God hath sealed up: these are
the careless ones: in the next world shall they perish beyond a doubt.

To those also who after their trials fled their country,18 then fought and
endured with patience, verily, thy Lord will in the end be forgiving,
gracious.

On a certain day shall every soul come to plead for itself, and every soul
shall be repaid according to its deeds; and they shall not be wronged.

God proposeth the instance of a city,19 secure and at ease, to which its
supplies come in plenty from every side. But she was thankless for the boons
of God; God therefore made her taste the woe20 of famine and of fear, for
what they had done.

Moreover, an apostle of their own people came to them, and they treated him
as an impostor. So chastisement overtook them because they were evil doers.

Of what God hath supplied you eat the lawful and good, and be grateful for
the favours of God, if ye are his worshippers.

Forbidden to you is that only which dieth of itself, and blood, and swine's
flesh, and that which hath been slain in the name of any other than God: but
if any be forced, and neither lust for it nor wilfully transgress, then
verily God is forgiving, gracious.21

And say not with a lie upon your tongue, "This is lawful and this is
forbidden:" for so will ye invent a lie concerning God: but they who invent a
lie of God shall not prosper:

Brief their enjoyment, but sore their punishment!

To the Jews22 we have forbidden that of which we before told thee; we injured
them not, but they injured themselves.

To those who have done evil in ignorance, then afterwards have repented and
amended, verily thy Lord is in the end right gracious, merciful.

Verily, Abraham was a leader in religion:23 obedient to God, sound in
faith:24 he was not of those who join gods with God.

Grateful was he for His favours: God chose him and guided him into the
straight way;

And we bestowed on him good things in this world: and in the world to come he
shall be among the just.

We have moreover revealed to thee that thou follow the religion of Abraham,
the sound in faith. He was not of those who join gods with God.

The Sabbath was only ordained for those who differed about it: and of a truth
thy Lord will decide between them on the day of resurrection as to the
subject of their disputes.

Summon thou to the way of thy Lord with wisdom and with kindly warning:
dispute with them in the kindest manner: thy Lord best knoweth those who
stray from his way, and He best knoweth those who have yielded to his
guidance.

If ye make reprisals,25 then make them to the same extent that ye were
injured: but if ye can endure patiently, best will it be for the patiently
enduring.

Endure then with patience. But thy patient endurance must be sought in none
but God. And be not grieved about the infidels, and be not troubled at their
devices; for God is with those who fear him and do good deeds.


_______________________

1 See Sura [lxxxiv.] x. 5, n.

2 Ex gutta spermatis. Pirke Aboth iii. Unde venisti? ex gutt√° foetid√¢. This
verse is said to be an allusion to a difficulty proposed by an idolatrous
Arab, who brought a carious leg-bone to Muhammad, and asked whether it could
be restored to life. Compare a similar argument for the Resurrection, Tr.
Sanhedrin, fol. 91 a.

3 Lit. there is beauty in them for you, i.e. they win you credit.

4 In allusion to Gen. xi. 1-10.

5 An Arabian idol.

6 Ps. xxxv. 9.

7 Lit. the family of the admonition, i.e. Jews and Christians versed in the
Pentateuch and Gospel.

8 The idolatrous Arabians regarded Angels as females and daughters of God.
But their own preference was always for male offspring. Thus Rabbinism
teaches that to be a woman is a great degradation. The modern Jew says in his
Daily Prayers, fol. 5, 6, "Blessed art thou, O Lord our God! King of the
Universe! who hath not made me a woman."

9 See Sura lxxxi. 8, p. 45. It is said that the only occasion on which Othman
ever shed a tear was when his little daughter, whom he was burying alive,
wiped the dust of the grave-earth from his beard.

10 Lit. the likeness of evil to those, etc.

11 The Arabs are curious in and fond of honey: Mecca alone affords eight or
nine varieties-green, white, red, and brown. Burton's Pilgr. iii. 110.

12 Ex. xx. 4.

13 The slave, and the dumb in verse following, are the idols.

14 See Sura [xcvii.] iii. 34, and n. 1, p. 114.

15 Gabriel.

16 This passage has been supposed to refer to Salman the Persian. He did not,
however, embrace Islam till a much later period, at Medina. N√∂ld. p. 110. Mr.
Muir thinks that it may refer to Suheib, son of Sinan, "the first fruits of
Greece," as Muhammad styled him, who, while yet a boy, had been carried off
by some Greeks as a slave, from Mesopotamia to Syria, brought by a party of
the Beni Kalb, and sold to Abdallah ibn Jodda'√¢n of Mecca. He became rich,
and embraced Islam. Dr. Sprenger thinks the person alluded to may have been
Addas, a monk of Nineveh, who had settled at Mecca. Life of M. p. 79.

17 This is to be understood of the persecutions endured by the more humble
and needy Muslims by their townspeople of Mecca.

18 From Mecca to Medina, i.e. the Mohadjers, to whom also verse 43 refers.
Both passages, therefore, are of a later date than the rest of this Sura.
Thus N√∂ldeke. Sprenger, however (Life, p. 159), explains this passage of the
seven slaves purchased and manumitted by Abu Bekr. They had been tortured for
professing Islam, shortly after Muhammad assumed the Prophetic office.

19 Mecca.

20 Lit. the garment.

21 Comp. Sura [lxxxix.] vi. 119.

22 Comp. Sura [lxxxix.] vi. 147. This verse as well as the following, and
verse 125, were probably added at Medina.

23 Antistes. Maracci. Or the text may be literally rendered Abraham was a
people, i.e. the people of Abraham; from whom the idolatrous Koreisch
pretended to derive their origin.

24 Ar. a Hanyf. According to a tradition in Waquidi, fol. 255, Zaid (who died
only five years before Muhammad received his first inspiration, and
undoubtedly prepared the way for many of his subsequent announcements)
adopted this term at the instance of a Christian and a Jew, who exhorted him
to become a Hanyf. Zaid having at this time renounced idolatry, and being
unable to receive either Judaism or Christianity, "What," said he, "is a
Hanyf?" They both told him, it was the religion of Abraham, who worshipped
nothing but God. On this Zaid exclaimed, "O God, I bear witness that I follow
the religion of Abraham." The root, whence Hanyf is derived, means generally
to turn from good to bad, or vice vers√¢, and is equivalent to the verbs
convert and pervert.

25 All Muhammadan commentators explain this verse as a prohibition to avenge
the death of Hamza on the Meccans with too great severity.


SURA XXX.-THE GREEKS [LXXIV.]

MECCA.-60 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM.1  THE GREEKS have been defeated2

In a land hard by: But after their defeat they shall defeat their foes,

In a few years.3  First and last is the affair with God. And on that day
shall the faithful rejoice

In the aid of their God: He aideth whom He will; and He is the Mighty, the
Merciful.

It is the promise of God: To his promise God will not be untrue: but most men
know it not.

They know the outward shews of this life present, but of the next life are
they careless.

Have they not considered within themselves that God hath not created the
Heavens and the Earth and all that is between them but for a serious end, and
for a fixed term? But truly most men believe not that they shall meet their
Lord.

Have they never journeyed through the land, and seen what hath been the end
of those who were before them? Mightier were they than these in strength; and
they broke up the land, and dwelt in it in greater numbers than they who
dwell there now; and their apostles came to them with proofs of their
mission: and it was not God who would wrong them, but they wronged
themselves.

Then evil was the end of the evil doers; because they had treated our signs
as lies, and laughed them to scorn.

God bringth forth the creation-then causeth it to return again-then to Him
shall ye come back.4

And on the day when the hour shall arrive, the guilty shall be struck dumb
for despair,

And they shall have no intercessors from among the gods whom they have joined
with God, and they shall deny the gods they joined with Him.

And on that day when the Hour shall arrive, shall men be separated one from
another;

And as for those who shall have believed and done the things that are right,
they shall enjoy themselves in a flowery mead;

But as for those who shall not have believed, but treated our signs and the
meeting of the next life as lies, they shall be given over to the torment.

Glorify God therefore when ye reach the evening, and when ye rise at morn:

And to Him be praise in the Heavens and on the Earth; and at twilight, and
when ye rest at noon.

He bringeth forth the living out of the dead, and He bringeth forth the dead
out of the living: and He quickeneth the earth when dead. Thus is it that ye
too shall be brought forth.5

And one of his signs it is that He hath created you out of dust; then lo! ye
become men who spread themselves far and wide:

And one of his signs it is, that He hath created wives for you of your own
species,6 that ye may dwell with them, and hath put love and tenderness
between you. Herein truly are signs for those who reflect.

And among his signs are the creation of the Heavens and of the Earth, and
your variety of tongues and colour. Herein truly are signs for all men.

And of his signs are your sleep by night and by day, and your goings in quest
of his bounties. Herein truly are signs to those who hearken.

And of his signs are, that He sheweth you the lightning, a source of awe and
hope; and that He sendeth down rain from the heaven and giveth life by it to
the earth when dead. Herein truly are signs to those who understand.

And of his signs also one is that the Heaven and the Earth stand firm at his
bidding: hereafter, when with one summons He shall summon you out of the
earth,-lo! forth shall ye come.

His, whatsoever is in the Heavens and on the Earth: all are obedient to him.

And He it is who bringeth a creature forth, then causeth it to return again;
and to him is this most easy. To whatever is loftiest in heaven and earth is
He to be likened; and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

He setteth forth to you an instance drawn from yourselves. Have ye among the
slaves whom your right hands have won, any partner in what we have bestowed
on you, so that ye share alike? Fear ye them as ye fear each other? (Thus
make we our signs clear to men of understanding.)

No, ye do not. But the wicked, devoid of knowledge, follow their own
desires:7 and those whom God shall mislead, who shall guide, and who shall be
their protector?

Set thou thy face then, as a true convert,8 towards the Faith which God hath
made, and for which He hath made man. No change is there in the creation of
God. This is the right Faith, but the greater part of men know it not.

And be ye turned to Him, and fear Him, and observe prayer, and be not of
those who unite gods with God:

Of those who have split up their religion, and have become sects, where every
party rejoices in what is their own.9

When some evil toucheth men, they turn to their Lord and call upon him: then
when he hath made them taste his mercy, lo, a part of them join other gods
with their Lord,

Ungrateful for our favours! Enjoy yourselves then. But in the end ye shall
know your folly.

Have we sent down to them any mandate which speaketh in favour of what they
join with God?

When we cause men to taste mercy they rejoice in it; but if, for that which
their hands have aforetime wrought, evil befall them, they despair.

See they not that God bestoweth full supplies on whom He pleaseth and giveth
sparingly to whom He pleaseth? Signs truly are there herein to those who
believe.

To him who is of kin to thee give his due, and to the poor and to the
wayfarer: this will be best for those who seek the face of God; and with them
it shall be well.

Whatever ye put out at usury to increase it with the substance of others
shall have no increase from God:10 but whatever ye shall give in alms, as
seeking the face of God, shall be doubled to you.

It is God who created you-then fed you-then will cause you to die-then will
make you alive. Is there any of your companion-gods who can do aught of these
things? Praise be to Him! and far be He exalted above the gods they join with
Him.

Destruction hath appeared by land and by sea on account of what men's hands
have wrought, that it might make them taste somewhat of the fruit of their
doings, that haply they might turn to God.

SAY: Journey through the land, and see what hath been the end of those who
were before you! The greater part of them joined other gods with God.

Set thy face then towards the right faith, ere the day come which none can
hinder God from bringing on.11 On that day shall they be parted in twain:

Unbelievers on whom shall be their unbelief; and they who have wrought
righteousness, and prepared for themselves couches of repose:

That of his bounty He may reward those who have believed and wrought
righteousness; for the unbelievers He loveth not.

And one of his signs is that He sendeth the winds with glad tidings of rain,
both that He may cause you to taste his mercy, and that ships may sail at his
command, that out of his bounties ye may seek wealth, and that haply ye may
render thanks.

We have sent apostles before thee to their peoples, and they presented
themselves to them with clear proofs of their mission; and while it behoved
us to succour the faithful, we took vengeance on the guilty.

It is God who sendeth the winds and uplifteth the clouds, and, as He
pleaseth, spreadeth them on high, and breaketh them up; and thou mayest see
the rain issuing from their midst; and when He poureth it down on such of his
servants as He pleaseth, lo! they are filled with joy,

Even they who before it was sent down to them, were in mute despair.

Look then at the traces of God's mercy-how after its death he quickeneth the
earth! This same God will surely quicken the dead, for to all things His
might is equal.

Yet should we send a blast, and should they see their harvest turn yellow,
they would afterwards shew themselves ungrateful.

Thou canst not make the dead to hear, neither canst thou make the deaf to
hear the call, when they withdraw and turn their backs:

Neither canst thou guide the blind out of their error: in sooth, none shalt
thou make to hear, save him who shall believe in our signs: for they are
resigned to our will (Muslims).

It is God who hath created you in weakness, then after weakness hath given
you strength: then after strength, weakness and grey hairs: He createth what
He will; and He is the Wise, the Powerful.

And on the day whereon the Hour shall arrive, the wicked will swear

That not above an hour have they waited: Even so did they utter lies on
earth:

But they to whom knowledge and faith have been given will say, "Ye have
waited, in accordance with the book of God, till the day of Resurrection: for
this is the day of the Resurrection-but ye knew it not."

On that day their plea shall not avail the wicked, neither shall they again
be bidden to seek acceptance with God.

And now have we set before men, in this Koran, every kind of parable: yet if
thou bring them a single verse of it, the infidels will surely say, "Ye are
only utterers of vain things."

It is thus that God hath sealed up the hearts of those who are devoid of
knowledge.

But do thou, Muhammad, bear with patience, for true is the promise of God;
and let not those who have no firm belief, unsettle thee.


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. 1, p. 32.

2 By the Persians; probably in Palestine in the 6th year before the Hejira,
under Khosrou Parviz. (Ann. 615. See Gibbon's Decline and Fall, ch. xlvi.)
The sympathies of Muhammad would naturally be enlisted on the side of the
Christians rather than on that of the idolatrous fire-worshippers, with whom
Islam had nothing in common.

3 This alludes to the defeat of the Persians by Heraclius, ann. 625. The
Muhammadans appeal to this passage as a clear proof of the inspiration of
their prophet. But it should be borne in mind that the vowel points of the
consonants of the Arabic word for defeated in verse 1, not being originally
written, and depending entirely on the speaker or reader, would make the
prophecy true in either event, according as the verb received an active or
passive sense in pronunciation. The whole passage was probably constructed
with the view of its proving true in any event.

4 Comp. Psalm xc. 30, in the Arabic version.

5 The Talmudists apply the description of God of the sender of the rain to
the divine command which shall cause the dead to arise. Taanith (init.).

6 Lit. from yourselves, i.e. either from the side of Adam or of human, and of
no other kind of being. Beidh.

7 By worshipping idols conjointly with God.

8 Lit. as a Hanyf. See note on the preceding Sura, 121, p. 209.

9 Peculiar to and distinctive of themselves. Muhammad had a just appreciation
of that narrowness of mind which is the characteristic of sectarians in every
age, who seize upon some one point of truth, through inability to grasp the
whole in its due proportions and bearing, and glory in it, as if the fragment
were the whole.

10 Comp. Ps. xv. 5.

11 Lit. which none can put back from God.


SURA XI.-HOUD [LXXV.]

MECCA.-123 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. RA.1 A book whose verses are stablished in wisdom and then set
forth with clearness from the Wise, the All-informed-

That ye worship none other than God-Verily I come to you from Him charged
with warnings, announcements;

And that ye seek pardon of your Lord, and then be turned unto Him! Goodly
enjoyments will He give you to enjoy until a destined time, and His favours
will He bestow on every one who deserves his favours.2 But if ye turn away,
then verily I fear for you the chastisement of the great day.

Unto God shall ye return, and over all things is he Potent.

Do they not doubly fold up their breasts, that they may hide themselves from
Him?

But when they enshroud themselves in their garments, doth He not know alike
what they conceal and what they shew?

For He knoweth the very inmost of their breast.

There is no moving thing on earth whose nourishment dependeth not on God; he
knoweth its haunts and final resting place: all is in the clear Book.

And He it is who hath made the Heavens and the Earth in six days: His throne
had stood ere this upon the waters,3 that He might make proof which of you4
would excel in works.

And if thou say, "After death ye shall surely be raised again," the infidels
will certainly exclaim, "This is nothing but pure sorcery."

And if we defer their chastisement to some definite time, they will exclaim,
"What keepeth it back?" What! will it not come upon them on a day when there
shall be none to avert it from them? And that at which they scoffed shall
enclose them in on every side.

And if we cause man to taste our mercy, and then deprive him of it, verily,
he is despairing, ungrateful.

And if after trouble hath befallen him we cause him to taste our favour, he
will surely exclaim, "The evils are passed away from me." Verily, he is
joyous, boastful.

Except those who endure with patience and do the things that are right: these
doth pardon await and a great reward.

Perhaps thou wilt suppress a part of what hath been revealed to thee, and
wilt be distress at heart lest they say, "If a treasure be not sent down to
him, or an angel come with him. . . ." But thou art only a warner, and God
hath all things in his charge.

If they shall say, "The Koran is his own device," SAY: Then bring ten Suras
like it5 of your devising, and call whom ye can to your aid beside God, if ye
are men of truth.

But if they answer you not, then know that it hath been sent down to you in
the wisdom of God only, and that there is no God but He. Are ye then Muslims?

Those who choose this present life and its braveries, we will recompense for
their works therein: they shall have nothing less therein than their deserts.

These are they for whom there is nothing in the next world but the Fire: all
that they have wrought in this life shall come to nought, and vain shall be
all their doings.

With such can they be compared who rest upon clear proofs from their Lord? to
whom a witness from him reciteth the Koran, and who is preceded by the Book
of Moses, a guide and mercy? These have faith in it: but the partisans of
idolatry, who believe not in it, are menaced with the fire! Have thou no
doubts about that Book, for it is the very truth from thy Lord. But most men
will not believe.

Who is guilty of a greater injustice than he who inventeth a lie concerning
God? They shall be set before their Lord, and the witnesses shall say, "These
are they who made their Lord a liar." Shall not the malison of God be on
these unjust doers,

Who pervert others from the way of God, and seek to make it crooked, and
believe not in a life to come? God's power on earth they shall not weaken;
and beside God they have no protector! Doubled shall be their punishment!
They were not able to hearken, and they could not see.

These are they who have lost their own souls, and the deities of their own
devising have vanished from them:

There is no doubt but that in the next world they shall be the lost ones.

But they who shall have believed and done the things that are right, and
humbled them before their Lord, shall be the inmates of Paradise; therein
shall they abide for ever.

These two sorts of persons resemble the blind and deaf, and the seeing and
hearing: shall these be compared as alike? Ah! do ye not comprehend?

We sent Noah of old unto his people:-"Verily I come to you a plain
admonisher,

That ye worship none but God. Verily I fear for you the punishment of a
grievous day."

Then said the chiefs of his people who believed not, "We see in thee but a
man like ourselves; and we see not who have followed thee except our meanest
ones of hasty judgment, nor see we any excellence in you above ourselves:
nay, we deem you liars."

He said: "O my people! how think you? If I am upon a clear revelation from my
Lord, who hath bestowed on me mercy from Himself to which ye are blind, can
we force it on you, if ye are averse from it?

And, O my people! I ask you not for riches: my reward is of God alone: and I
will not drive away those who believe that they shall meet their Lord:-but I
see that ye are an ignorant people.

And, O my people! were I to drive them away, who shall help me against God?
Will ye not therefore consider?

And I tell you not that with me are the treasures of God: nor do I say, 'I
know the things unseen;' nor do I say, 'I am an angel;' nor do I say of those
whom you eye with scorn, No good thing will God bestow on them:-God best
knoweth what is in their minds-for then should I be one of those who act
unjustly."

They said: "O Noah! already hast thou disputed with us, and multiplied
disputes with us: Bring then upon us what thou hast threatened, if thou be of
those who speak truth."

He said, "God will bring it on you at His sole pleasure, and it is not you
who can weaken him;

Nor, if God desire to mislead you, shall my counsel profit you, though I fain
would counsel you aright. He is your Lord, and unto Him shall ye be brought
back.

Do they say, "This Koran is of his own devising?" Say: On me be my own guilt,
if I have devised it, but I am clear of that whereof ye are guilty.

And it was revealed unto Noah. Verily, none of thy people shall believe, save
they who have believed already; therefore be not thou grieved at their
doings.

But build the Ark under our eye and after our revelation: and plead not with
me for the evil doers, for they are to be drowned.

So he built the Ark; and whenever the chiefs of his people passed by they
laughed him to scorn:6 said he, "Though ye laugh at us, we truly shall laugh
at you, even as ye laugh at us; and in the end ye shall know

On whom a punishment shall come that shall shame him, and on whom shall light
a lasting punishment."

Thus was it until our sentence came to pass, and the earth's surface7 boiled
up. We said, "Carry into it one pair of every kind, and thy family, except
him on whom sentence hath before been passed, and those who have believed."
But there believed not with him except a few.

And he said, "Embark ye therein. In the name of God be its course and its
riding at anchor! Truly my Lord is right Gracious, Merciful."

And the Ark moved on with them amid waves like mountains: and Noah called to
his son-for he was apart-"Embark with us, O my child! and be not with the
unbelievers."

He said, "I will betake me to a mountain that shall secure me from the
water." He said, "None shall be secure this day from the decree of God, save
him on whom He shall have mercy." And a wave passed between them, and he was
among the drowned.

And it was said, "O Earth! swallow up thy water;" and "cease, O Heaven!" And
the water abated, and the decree was fulfilled, and the Ark rested upon Al-
Djoudi;8 and it was said, "Avaunt! ye tribe of the wicked!"

And Noah called on his Lord and said, "O Lord! verily my son is of my family:
and thy promise is true, and thou art the most just of judges."

He said, "O Noah! verily, he is not of thy family: in this thou actest not
aright.9 Ask not of me that whereof thou knowest nought: I warn thee that
thou become not of the ignorant.

He said, "To thee verily, O my Lord, do I repair lest I ask that of thee
wherein I have no knowledge: unless thou forgive me and be merciful to me I
shall be one of the lost.

It was said to him, "O Noah! debark with peace from Us, and with blessings on
thee and on peoples to be born from those who are with thee; but as for other
and unbelieving peoples, we will give them their good things in this world,
but hereafter shall a grievous punishment light on them from us.

This is one of the secret Histories: we reveal it unto thee: neither thou nor
thy people knew it ere this: be patient thou: verily, there is a prosperous
issue to the God-fearing.

And unto Ad we sent their Brother HOUD. He said, "O my people, worship God.
You have no God beside Him. Ye only devise a lie.

O my people! I ask of you no recompense for this: my recompense is with Him
only who hath made me. Will ye not then understand?

O my people! ask pardon of your Lord; then be turned unto Him: He will send
down the heavens upon you with copious rains:

And with strength on strength will He increase you: only turn not back with
deeds of evil."

They said, "O Houd, thou hast not brought us proofs of thy mission: we will
not abandon our gods at thy word, and we believe thee not.

We can only say that some of our gods have smitten thee with evil." Said he,
"Now take I God to witness, and do ye also witness, that I am clear of your
joining other gods

To God. Conspire then against me all of you, and delay me not.

For I trust in God, my Lord and yours. No single beast is there which he
holdeth not by its forelock. Right, truly, is the way in which my Lord goeth.

But if ye turn back, I have already declared to you my message. And my Lord
will put another people in your place, nor shall ye at all hurt Him; verily,
my Lord keepeth watch over all things."

And when our doom came to be inflicted, we rescued Houd and those who had
like faith with Him, by our special mercy: we rescued them from the rigorous
chastisement.

These men of Ad gainsaid the signs of their Lord, and rebelled against his
messengers, and followed the bidding of every proud contumacious person.

Followed therefore were they in this world by a curse; and in the day of the
Resurrection it shall be said to them, "What! Did not Ad disbelieve their
Lord?" Was not Ad, the people of Houd, cast far away?

And unto Themoud we sent their Brother Saleh:10-"O my people! said he,
worship God: you have no other god than Him. He hath raised you up out of the
earth, and hath given you to dwell therein. Ask pardon of him then, and be
turned unto him; for thy Lord is nigh, ready to answer."

They said, "O Saleh! our hopes were fixed on thee till now:11 forbiddest thou
us to worship what our fathers worshipped? Truly we misdoubt the faith to
which thou callest us, as suspicious."

He said, "O my people! what think ye? If I have a revelation from my Lord to
support me, and if He hath shewed his mercy on me, who could protect me from
God if I rebel against him? Ye would only confer on me increase of ruin.

O my people! this is the she-Camel of God, and a sign unto you. Let her go at
large and feed in God's earth, and do her no harm, lest a speedy punishment
overtake you."

Yet they hamstrung her: then said he, "Yet three days more enjoy yourselves
in your dwellings: this menace will not prove untrue."

And when our sentence came to pass, we rescued Saleh and those who had a like
faith with him, by our mercy, from ignominy on that day. Verily, thy Lord is
the Strong, the Mighty!

And a violent tempest overtook the wicked, and they were found in the morning
prostrate in their dwellings,

As though they had never abode in them. What! Did not Themoud disbelieve his
Lord? Was not Themoud utterly cast off?

And our messengers came formerly to Abraham with glad tidings. "Peace," said
they. He said, "Peace," and he tarried not, but brought a roasted calf.

And when he saw that their hands touched it not,12 he misliked them, and grew
fearful of them. They said, "Fear not, for we are sent to the people of Lot."

His wife was standing by and laughed;13 and we announced Isaac to her; and
after Isacc, Jacob.

She said, "Ah, woe is me! shall I bear a son when I am old, and when this my
husband is an old man? This truly would be a marvellous thing."

They said, "Marvellest thou at the command of God? God's mercy and blessing
be upon you, O people of this house; praise and glory are His due!"

And when Abraham's fear had passed away, and these glad tidings had reached
him, he pleaded with us for the people of Lot. Verily, Abraham was right
kind, pitiful, relenting.

"O Abraham! desist from this; for already hath the command of thy God gone
forth; as for them, a punishment not to be averted is coming on them."

And when our messengers came to Lot, he was grieved for them; and he was too
weak to protect them,14 and he said, "This is a day of difficulty."

And his people came rushing on towards him, for aforetime had they wrought
this wickedness. He said, "O my people! these my daughters will be purer for
you: fear God, and put me not to shame in my guests. Is there no rightminded
man among you?"

They said, "Thou knowest now that we need not thy daughters; and thou well
knowest what we require."

He said, "Would that I had strength to resist you, or that I could find
refuge with some powerful chieftain."15

The Angels said, "O Lot! verily, we are the messengers of thy Lord: they
shall not touch thee: depart with thy family in the dead of night, and let
not one of you turn back: as for thy wife, on her shall light what shall
light on them. Verily, that with which they are threatened is for the
morning. Is not the morning near?"

And when our decree came to be executed we turned those cities upside down,
and we rained down upon them blocks of claystone one after another, marked16
by thy Lord himself. Nor are they far distant from the wicked Meccans.

And we sent to Madian17 their brother Shoaib. He said, "O my people! worship
God: no other God have you than He: give not short weight and measure: I see
indeed that ye revel in good things; but I fear for you the punishment of the
all-encompassing day.

O my people! give weight and measure with fairness; purloin not other men's
goods; and perpetrate not injustice on the earth with corrupt practices:

A residue,18 the gift of God, will be best for you if ye are believers:

But I am not a guardian over you."

They said to him, "O Shoaib! is it thy prayers which enjoin that we should
leave what our fathers worshipped, or that we should not do with our
substance as pleaseth us? Thou forsooth art the mild, the right director!"

He said, "O my people! How think ye? If I have a clear revelation from my
Lord, and if from Himself He hath supplied me with goodly supplies, and if I
will not follow you in that which I myself forbid you, do I seek aught but
your amendment so far as in me lieth? My sole help is in God. In Him do I
trust, and to Him do I turn me.

O my people! let not your opposition to me draw down upon you the like of
that which befel the people of Noah, or the people of Houd, or the people of
Saleh: and the abodes of the people of Lot are not far distant from you!

Seek pardon of your Lord and be turned unto Him: verily, my Lord is Merciful,
Loving.

They said, "O Shoaib! we understand not much of what thou sayest, and we
clearly see that thou art powerless among us: were it not for thy family we
would have surely stoned thee, nor couldest thou have prevailed against us."

He said, "O my people! think ye more highly of my family than of God? Cast ye
Him behind your back, with neglect? Verily, my Lord is round about your
actions.

And, O my people! act with what power ye can for my hurt: I verily will act:
and ye shall know

On whom shall light a punishment that shall disgrace him, and who is the
liar. Await ye; verily I will await with you."

And when our decree came to pass, we delivered Shoaib and his companions in
faith, by our mercy: And a violent tempest overtook the wicked, and in the
morning they were found prostrate in their houses

As if they had never dwelt in them. Was not Madian swept off even as Themoud
had been swept off?

Of old sent we Moses with our signs and with incontestable power to Pharaoh,
and to his nobles-who followed the behests of Pharaoh, and, unrighteous were
Pharaoh's behests.

He shall head his people on the day of the Resurrection and cause them to
descend into the fire: and wretched the descent by which they shall descend!

They were followed by a curse in this world; and in the day of the
Resurrection, wretched the gift that shall be given them!

Such, the histories of the cities which we relate to thee. Some of them are
standing, others mown down:

We dealt not unfairly by them, but they dealt not fairly by themselves: and
their gods on whom they called beside God availed them not at all when thy
Lord's behest came to pass. They did but increase their ruin.

Such was thy Lord's grasp19 when he laid that grasp on the cities that had
been wicked. Verily his grasp is afflictive, terrible!

Herein truly is a sign for him who feareth the punishment of the latter day.
That shall be a day unto which mankind shall be gathered together; that shall
be a day witnessed by all creatures.

Nor do we delay it, but until a time appointed.

When that day shall come no one shall speak a word but by His leave, and some
shall be miserable and others blessed.

And as for those who shall be consigned to misery-their place the Fire!
therein shall they sigh and bemoan them-

Therein shall they abide while the Heavens and the Earth shall last, unless
thy Lord shall will it otherwise; verily thy Lord doth what He chooseth.

And as for the blessed ones-their place the Garden! therein shall they abide
while the Heavens and the Earth endure, with whatever imperishable boon thy
Lord may please to add.

Have thou no doubts therefore concerning that which they worship: they
worship but what their fathers worshipped before them: we will surely assign
them their portion with nothing lacking.

Of old gave we Moses the Book, and they fell to variance about it. If a
decree of respite had not gone forth from thy Lord, there had surely been a
decision between them. Thy people also are in suspicious doubts about the
Koran.

And truly thy Lord will repay every one according to their works! for He is
well aware of what they do.

Go straight on then as thou hast been commanded, and he also who hath turned
to God with thee, and let him transgress no more. He beholdeth what ye do.

Lean not on the evil doers lest the Fire lay hold on you. Ye have no
protector, save God, and ye shall not be helped against Him.

And observe prayer at early morning, at the close of the day, and at the
approach of night; for the good deeds drive away the evil deeds. This is a
warning for those who reflect:

And persevere steadfastly, for verily God will not suffer the reward of the
righteous to perish.

Were the generations before you, endued with virtue, and who forbad corrupt
doings on the earth, more than a few of those whom we delivered? but the evil
doers followed their selfish pleasures, and became transgressors.

And thy Lord was not one who would destroy those cities unjustly, when its
inhabitants were righteous.

Had thy Lord pleased he would have made mankind of one religion: but those
only to whom thy Lord hath granted his mercy will cease to differ. And unto
this hath He created them; for the word of thy Lord shall be fulfilled, "I
will wholly fill hell with Djinn and men."

And all that we have related to thee of the histories of these Apostles, is
to confirm thy heart thereby. By these hath the truth reached thee, and a
monition and warning to those who believe.

But say to those who believe not, "Act as ye may and can: we will act our
part: and wait ye; we verily will wait."

To God belong the secret things of the Heavens and of the Earth: all things
return to him: worship him then and put thy trust in Him: thy Lord is not
regardless of your doings.20


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. p. 32.

2 Or, will bestow his grace on every gracious one, or will bestow his
abundance on every one who hath abundance (of merit). The difficulty of
rendering this passage arises from the word fadhl, which means merit as
applied to man, favour as applied to God.

3 That is, before the Creation. Precisely the same statement occurs in Raschi
on Gen. i. 2, also in the modern catechism. Tsenah ur'enak b'noth Tsion,
authoritatively put forth by the Polish and German Talmudist Rabbins. "At the
first creation of Heaven and Earth . . . the throne of glory of the Blessed
God stood in the air above the waters." Comp. Ps. civ. 3.

4 Men, heaven, and earth. Comp. Tr. Aboth, v. Mischna 1.

5 Comp. verse 37 and Sura [xci.] ii. 21. It should be observed that the
challenge in these passages is not to produce a book which shall equal the
Koran in point of poetry or rhetoric, but in the importance of its subject-
matter with reference to the Divine Unity, the future retribution, etc. Upon
these topics Muhammad well knew that he had preoccupied the ground. And we
may infer from the fragments of the Revelations of Musailima and Saj√¢h
(Hisam. 946; Attab√¢ri (ed. Kosegarten) i. 134, 136, 152; Tab. Ag√¢ni, 339),
which are mere imitations of the Koran, that he felt this to be the case.

6 "They laughed and jeered at him in their words." Midr. Tanchuma. "The
passage Job xii. 5, refers to the righteous Noah who taught them and spake to
them words severe as flames: but they scorned him, and said, 'Old man! for
what purpose is this ark?"' Sanhedr. 108. Comp. Midr. Rabbah on Gen. 30, and
33 on Eccl. ix. 14.

7 Or, oven: according to others, reservoir. Geiger thinks that the expression
the oven boiled up may be a figurative mode of expressing the Rabbinic idea
that "the generation of the Deluge were punished by hot water." Rosch.
Haschanah, 16, 2; Sanhedr. 108. Comp. Weil's Legenden, p. 44.

8 The Montes Gordyoei, perhaps.

9 According to another reading: He hath done amiss. The origin of this story
is probably Gen. ix. 20-25.

10 A Prophet, so far as we know, of Muhammad's own invention, unless Muir's
conjecture be admitted that he was a Christian or Jewish missionary whose
adventures and persecution were recast into this form.-The name may have been
suggested by, Methusaleh, upon whose piety the Midrasch enlarges.

11 That is, we had intended to make thee our chief. Beidh.

12 Thus, in contradiction to Gen. xviii. 8, the Rabbins; comp. Tr. Baba
Mezia, fol. 86, "They made as though they ate."

13 Or, menstrua passa est, in token of the possibility of her bearing a
child.

14 Lit. his arm was straitened concerning them.

15 Lit. column.

16 With the name, it is said, of the person each should strike.

17 See Sura [lvi.] xxvi. 176.

18 That is, after giving fair measure.

19 Seizure, for punishment. Hence, the punishment itself.

20 In the later period of his life Muhammad attributed his gray hairs to the
effect produced upon him by this Sura and its "Sisters." While Abu Bekr and
Omar sat in the mosque at Medina, Muhammad suddenly came upon them from the
door of one of his wives' houses.  . . .  And Abu Bekr said, "Ah! thou for
whom I would sacrifice father and mother, white hairs are hastening upon
thee!" And the Prophet raised up his beard with his hand and gazed at it; and
Abu Bekr's eyes filled with tears. "Yes," said Muhammad, "H≈±d and its sisters
have hastened my white hairs." "And what," asked Abu Bekr, "are its sisters?"
"The Inevitable (Sura lvi.) and the Blow (Sura ci.)." Kit√¢b al Wackidi, p.
84, ap. Muir.


SURA XIV.-ABRAHAM, ON WHOM BE PEACE [LXXVI.]

MECCA.-52 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. RA. This Book have we sent down to thee that by their Lord's
permission thou mayest bring men out of darkness into light, into the path of
the Mighty, the Glorious-

Of God; to whom belongeth whatever is in the Heavens and whatever is on the
Earth: and woe! for their terrible punishment, to the infidels,

Who love the life that now is, above that which is to come, and mislead from
the way of God, and seek to make it crooked. These are in a far-gone error.

And in order that He might speak plainly to them, we have not sent any
Apostle, save with the speech of his own people; but God misleadeth whom He
will, and whom He will he guideth: and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

Of old did we send Moses with our signs: and said to him, "Bring forth thy
people from the darkness into the light, and remind them of the days of God."
Verily, in this are signs for every patient, grateful person:

When Moses said to his people, "Remember the kindness of God to you, when he
rescued you from the family of Pharaoh who laid on you a cruel affliction,
slaughtering your male children, and suffering only your females to live." In
this was a sore trial from your Lord-

And when your Lord caused it to be heard that, "If we render thanks then will
I surely increase you more and more: but if ye be thankless. . . .  Verily,
right terrible my chastisement."

And Moses said, "If ye and all who are on the Earth be thankless, yet truly
God is passing Rich, and worthy of all praise."

Hath not the story reached you of those who were before you, the people of
Noah, and Ad, and Themoud,

And of those who lived after them? None knoweth them but God. When their
prophets came to them with proofs of their mission, they put their hands on
their mouths and said, "In sooth, we believe not your message; and in sooth,
of that to which you bid us, we are in doubt, as of a thing suspicious."

Their prophets said: "Is there any doubt concerning God, maker of the Heavens
and of the Earth, who calleth you that He may pardon your sins, and respite
you until an appointed time?"

They said, "Ye are but men like us: fain would ye turn us from our fathers'
worship. Bring us therefore some clear proof."

Their Apostles said to them, "We are indeed but men like you. But God
bestoweth favours on such of his servants as he pleaseth, and it is not in
our power to bring you any special proof,

But by the leave of God. In God therefore let the faithful trust.

And why should we not put our trust in God, since He hath already guided us
in our ways. We will certainly bear with constancy the harm you would do to
us. In God let the trustful trust."

And they who believed not said to their Apostles, "Forth from our land will
we surely drive you, or, to our religion shall ye return." Then their Lord
revealed to them, "We will certainly destroy the wicked doers,

And we shall certainly cause you to dwell in the land after them. This for
him who dreadeth the appearance at my judgment-seat and who dreadeth my
menace!"

Then sought they help from God, and every proud rebellious one perished:

Hell is before him: and of tainted water shall he be made to drink:

He shall sup it and scarce swallow it for loathing; and Death shall assail
him on every side, but he shall not die: and before him shall be seen a
grievous torment.

A likeness of those who believe not in their Lord. Their works are like ashes
which the wind scattereth on a stormy day: no advantage shall they gain from
their works. This is the far-gone wandering.

Seest thou not that in truth1 hath God created the Heavens and the Earth?
Were such his pleasure He could make you pass away, and cause a new creation
to arise.

And this would not be hard for God.

All mankind shall come forth before God; and the weak shall say to the men of
might, "Verily, we were your followers: will ye not then relieve us of some
part of the vengeance of God?"

They shall say, "If God had guided us, we surely had guided you. It is now
all one whether we be impatient, or endure with patience. We have no escape."

And after doom hath been given, Satan shall say, "Verily, God promised you a
promise of truth: I, too, made you a promise, but I deceived you. Yet I had
no power over you:

But I only called you and ye answered me. Blame not me then, but blame
yourselves: I cannot aid you, neither can ye aid me. I never believed that I
was His equal with whom ye joined me."2 As for the evil doers, a grievous
torment doth await them.

But they who shall have believed and done the things that be right, shall be
brought into gardens beneath which the rivers flow: therein shall they abide
for ever by the permission of their Lord: their greeting therein shall be
"Peace."

Seest thou not to what God likeneth a good word?3 To a good tree: its root
firmly fixed, and its branches in the Heaven:

Yielding its fruit in all seasons by the will of its Lord. God setteth forth
these similitudes to men that haply they may reflect.

And an evil word is like an evil tree torn up from the face of the earth, and
without strength to stand.

Those who believe shall God stablish by his steadfast word both in this life
and in that which is to come: but the wicked shall He cause to err: God doth
his pleasure.

Hast thou not beholden those who repay the goodness of God with infidelity,
and sink their people into the abode of perdition-

Hell? Therein shall they be burned; and wretched the dwelling!

They set up compeers with God in order to mislead man from his way. SAY:
Enjoy your pleasures yet awhile, but assuredly, your going hence shall be
into the fire.

Speak to my servants who have believed, that they observe prayer, and give
alms of that with which we have supplied them, both privately and openly, ere
the day come when there shall be neither traffic nor friendship.

It is God who hath created the Heavens and the Earth, and sendeth down water
from the Heaven, and so bringeth forth the fruits for your food: And He hath
subjected to you the ships, so that by His command, they pass through the
sea; and He hath subjected the rivers to you: and He hath subjected to you
the sun and the moon in their constant courses: and He hath subjected the day
and the night to you: of everything which ye ask Him, giveth He to you; and
if ye would reckon up the favours of God, ye cannot count them! Surely man is
unjust, ungrateful!

ABRAHAM said, "O Lord make this land secure, and turn aside me and my
children from serving idols:

For many men, O my Lord, have they led astray. But whosoever shall follow me,
he truly shall be of me; and whosoever shall disobey me. . . .  Thou truly
art Gracious, Merciful.

O our Lord! verily I have settled some of my offspring in an unfruitful
valley, nigh to thy holy house;4 O our Lord, that they may strictly observe
prayer! Make thou therefore the hearts of men to yearn toward them, and
supply them with fruits that they may be thankful.

O our Lord! thou truly knowest what we hide and what we bring to light;
nought on earth or in heaven is hidden from God. Praise be to God who hath
given me, in my old age, Ismael and Isaac! My Lord is the hearer of prayer.

Lord! grant that I and my posterity may observe prayer. O our Lord! and grant
this my petition. O our Lord! forgive me and my parents and the faithful, on
the day wherein account shall be taken."

Think thou not that God is regardless of the deeds of the wicked. He only
respiteth them to the day on which all eyes shall stare up with terror:

They hasten forward in fear; their heads upraised in supplication; their
looks riveted; and their hearts a blank. Warn men therefore of the day when
the punishment shall overtake them,

And when the evil doers shall say, "O our Lord! respite us yet a little
while:5

To thy call will we make answer; thine Apostles will we follow." "Did ye not
once swear that no change should befal you?

Yet ye dwelt in the dwellings of those6 who were the authors of their
undoing7 and it was made plain to you how we had dealt with them; and we held
them up to you as examples. They plotted their plots: but God could master
their plots, even though their plots had been so powerful as to move the
mountains."

Think not then that God will fail his promise to his Apostles: aye! God is
mighty, and Vengeance is His.

On the day when the Earth shall be changed into another Earth, and the
Heavens also, men shall come forth unto God, the Only, the Victorious.

And thou shalt see the wicked on that day linked together in chains-

Their garments of pitch, and fire shall enwrap their faces that God may
reward every soul as it deserveth; verily God is prompt to reckon.

This is a message for mankind, that they may thereby be warned: and that they
may know that there is but one God; and that men of understanding may ponder
it.


_______________________

1 See Sura [lxxxiv.] x. 5.

2 Lit. I truly renounce your having associated me (with God) heretofore.

3 The preaching and the profession of Islam. Comp. Ps. i. 3, 4.

4 The Caaba.

5 Lit. to a term near at hand.

6 Of the anciently destroyed cities of Themoud, Ad, etc.

7 Lit. were unjust to their own souls.

SURA XII.-JOSEPH, PEACE BE ON HIM [LXXVII.]

MECCA.-III Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. RA.1 These are signs of the clear Book.

An Arabic Koran have we sent it down, that ye might understand it.

In revealing to thee this Koran,2 one of the most beautiful of narratives
will we narrate to thee, of which thou hast hitherto been regardless.

When Joseph said to his Father, "O my Father! verily I beheld eleven stars
and the sun and the moon-beheld them make obeisance to me!"3

He said, "O my son! tell not thy vision to thy brethren, lest they plot a
plot against thee: for Satan is the manifest foe of man.

It is thus that thy Lord shall choose thee and will teach thee the
interpretation of dark saying, and will perfect his favours on thee and on
the family of Jacob, as of old he perfected it on thy fathers Abraham and
Isaac; verily thy Lord is Knowing, Wise!"

Now in JOSEPH and his brethren are signs for the enquirers;4

When they said, "Surely better loved by our Father, than we, who are more in
number, is Joseph and his brother; verily, our father hath clearly erred.

Slay ye Joseph! or drive him to some other land, and on you alone shall your
father's face be set! and after this, ye shall live as upright persons."

One of them said, "Slay not Joseph, but cast him down to the bottom of the
well: if ye do so, some wayfarers will take him up."

They said, "O our Father! why dost thou not entrust us with Joseph? indeed we
mean him well.

Send him with us to-morrow that he may enjoy himself and sport: we will
surely keep him safely."

He said, "Verily, your taking him away will grieve me; and I fear lest while
ye are heedless of him the wolf devour him."

They said, "Surely if the wolf devour him, and we so many, we must in that
case be weak indeed."5

And when they went away with him they agreed to place him at the bottom of
the well. And We revealed to him, "Thou wilt yet tell them of this their
deed, when they shall not know thee."

And they came at nightfall to their father weeping.

They said, "O our Father! of a truth, we went to run races, and we left
Joseph with our clothes, and the wolf devoured him: but thou wilt not believe
us even though we speak the truth."

And they brought his shirt with false blood upon it. He said, "Nay, but
yourselves have managed this affair.6 But patience is seemly: and the help of
God is to be implored that I may bear what you tell me."

And wayfarers came and sent their drawer of water,7 and he let down his
bucket. "Good news!"8 said he, "This is a youth!" And they kept his case
secret, to make merchandise of him. But God knew what they did.

And they sold him for a paltry price-for some dirhems counted down, and at no
high rate did they value him.

And he who bought him-an Egyptian-said to his wife, "Treat him hospitably;
haply he may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." Thus did we
settle Joseph in the land, and we instructed him in the interpretation of
dark sayings, for God is equal to his purpose; but most men know it not.

And when he had reached his age of strength we bestowed on him judgment and
knowledge; for thus do we recompense the well doers.

And she in whose house he was conceived a passion for him, and she shut the
doors and said, "Come hither." He said, "God keep me! Verily, my lord hath
given me a good home: and the injurious shall not prosper."

But she longed for him; and he had longed for her had he not seen a token
from his lord.9 Thus we averted evil and defilement from him, for he was one
of our sincere servants.

And they both made for the door, and she rent his shirt behind; and at the
door they met her lord. "What," said she, "shall be the recompense of him who
would do evil to thy family, but a prison10 or a sore punishment?"

He said, "She solicited me to evil." And a witness out of her own family11
witnessed: "If his shirt be rent in front she speaketh truth, and he is a
liar:

But if his shirt be rent behind, she lieth and he is true."

And when his lord saw his shirt torn behind, he said, "This is one of your
devices! verily your devices are great!

Joseph! leave this affair. And thou, O wife, ask pardon for thy crime, for
thou hast sinned."

And in the city, the women said, "The wife of the Prince hath solicited her
servant: he hath fired her with his love: but we clearly see her manifest
error."

And when she heard of their cabal, she sent to them and got ready a banquet
for them, and gave each one of them a knife, and said, "Joseph shew thyself
to them." And when they saw him they were amazed at him, and cut their
hands,12 and said, "God keep us! This is no man! This is no other than a
noble angel!"

She said, "This is he about whom ye blamed me. I wished him to yield to my
desires, but he stood firm. But if he obey not my command, he shall surely be
cast into prison, and become one of the despised."

He said, "O my Lord! I prefer the prison to compliance with their bidding:
but unless thou turn away their snares from me, I shall play the youth with
them, and become one of the unwise."

And his Lord heard him and turned aside their snares from him: for he is the
Hearer, the Knower.

Yet resolved they, even after they had seen the signs of his innocence, to
imprison him for a time.

And there came into the prison with him two youths. Said one of them,
"Methought in my dream that I was pressing grapes." And the other said, "I
dreamed that I was carrying bread on my head, of which the birds did eat.
Declare to us the interpretation of this, for we see thou art a virtuous
person."

He said, "There shall not come to you in a dream any food wherewith ye shall
be fed, but I will acquaint you with its interpretation ere it come to pass
to you. This is a part of that which my Lord hath taught me: for I have
abandoned the religion13 of those who believe not in God and who deny the
life to come;

And I follow the religion of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. We may
not associate aught with God. This is of God's bounty towards us and towards
mankind: but the greater part of mankind are not thankful.

O my two fellow prisoners! are sundry lords best, or God, the One, the
Mighty?

Ye worship beside him mere names which ye have named, ye and your fathers,
for which God hath not sent down any warranty. Judgment belongeth to God
alone. He hath bidden you worship none but Him. This is the right faith: but
most men know it not.

O my two fellow prisoners! as to one of you, he will serve wine unto his
Lord: but as to the other, he will be crucified and the birds shall eat from
off his head. The matter is decreed concerning which ye enquire."

And he said unto him who he judged would be set at large, "Remember me with
thy lord." But Satan caused him to forget the remembrance of his Lord,14 so
he remained some years in prison.

And the King said, "Verily, I saw in a dream seven fat kine which seven lean
devoured; and seven green ears and other withered. O nobles, teach me my
vision, if a vision ye are able to expound."

They said, "They are confused dreams, nor know we aught of the unravelling of
dreams."

And he of the twain who had been set at large, said, "I will tell you the
interpretation; let me go for it."

"Joseph, man of truth! teach us of the seven fat kine which seven lean
devoured, and of the seven green ears, and other withered, that I may return
to the men, and that they may be informed."

He said, "Ye shall sow seven years as is your wont, and the corn which ye
reap leave ye in its ear, except a little of which ye shall eat.

Then after that shall come seven grievous years which shall eat what ye have
stored for them, except a little which ye shall have kept.

Then shall come after this a year, in which men shall have rain, and in which
they shall press the grape."

And the King said, "Bring him to me."15 And when the messenger came to Joseph
he said, "Go back to thy lord, and ask him what meant the women who cut their
hands, for my lord well knoweth the snare they laid."

Then said the Prince to the women, "What was your purpose when ye solicited
Joseph?" They said, "God keep us! we know not any ill of him." The wife of
the Prince said, "Now doth the truth appear. It was I who would have led him
into unlawful love, and he is one of the truthful."

"By this" (said Joseph) "may my lord know that I did not in his absence play
him false, and that God guideth not the machinations of deceivers.

Yet I hold not myself clear, for the heart is prone to evil, save theirs on
whom my Lord hath mercy; for gracious is my Lord, Merciful."

And the King said, "Bring him to me: I will take him for my special service."
And when he had spoken with him he said, "From this day shalt thou be with
us, invested with place and trust."

He said, "Set me over the granaries of the land,16 I will be their prudent
keeper!"

Thus did we stablish Joseph in the land that he might house himself therein
at pleasure. We bestow our favours on whom we will, and suffer not the reward
of the righteous to perish.

And truly the recompense of the life to come is better, for those who have
believed and feared God.

And Joseph's brethren came and went in to him and he knew them, but they
recognised him not.

And when he had provided them with their provision, he said, "Bring me your
brother from your father. See ye not that I fill the measure, and am the best
of hosts?

But if ye bring him not to me, then no measure of corn shall there be for you
from me, nor shall ye come near me."

They said, "We will ask him of his father, and we will surely do it."

Said he to his servants, "Put their money into their camel-packs, that they
may perceive it when they have returned to their family: haply they will come
back to us."

And when they returned to their father, they said, "O, our father! corn is
withholden from us: send, therefore, our brother with us and we shall have
our measure; and all care of him will we take."

He said, "Shall I entrust you with him otherwise than as I before entrusted
you with his brother? But God is the best guardian, and of those who shew
compassion He is the most compassionate."

And when they opened their goods they found their money had been returned to
them. They said, "O, our father, what more can we desire? Here is our money
returned to us; we will provide corn for our families, and will take care of
our brother, and shall receive a camel's burden more of corn. This is an easy
quantity."17

He said, "I will not send him with you but on your oath before God that ye
will, indeed, bring him back to me, unless hindrances encompass you." And
when they had given him their pledge, he said, "God is witness of what we
say."

And he said, "O, my sons! Enter not by one gate, but enter by different
gates.18 Yet can I not help you against aught decreed by God: judgment
belongeth to God alone. In Him put I my trust, and in Him let the trusting
trust."

And when they entered as their father had bidden them, it did not avert from
them anything decreed of God; but it only served to satisfy a desire in the
soul of Jacob which he had charged them to perform; for he was possessed of
knowledge which we had taught him; but most men have not that knowledge.

And when they came in to Joseph, he took his brother to him. He said,
"Verily, I am thy brother. Be not thou grieved for what they did."19

And when he had provided them with their provisions, he placed his drinking
cup in his brother's camel-pack. Then a crier cried after them, "O
travellers! ye are surely thieves."

They turned back to them and said, "What is that ye miss?"

"We miss," said they, "the prince's cup. For him who shall restore it, a
camel's load of corn! I pledge myself for it."

They said, "By God! ye know certainly that we came not to do wrong20 in the
land and we have not been thieves."

"What," said the Egyptians, "shall be the recompense of him who hath stolen
it, if ye be found liars?"

They said, "That he in whose camel-pack it shall be found be given up to you
in satisfaction for it. Thus recompense we the unjust."

And Joseph began with their sacks, before the sack of his brother, and then
from the sack of his brother he drew it out. This stratagem did we suggest to
Joseph. By the King's law he had no power to seize his brother, had not God
pleased. We uplift into grades of wisdom whom we will. And there is one
knowing above every one else endued with knowledge.

They said, "If he steal, a brother of his hath stolen heretofore."21 But
Joseph kept his secret, and did not discover it to them. Said he, aside, "Ye
are in the worse condition. And God well knoweth what ye state."

They said, "O Prince! Verily he hath a very aged father; in his stead,
therefore, take one of us, for we see that thou art a generous person."

He said, "God forbid that we should take but him with whom our property was
found, for then should we act unjustly."

And when they despaired of Benjamin, they went apart for counsel. The eldest
of them said, "Know ye not how that your father hath taken a pledge from you
before God, and how formerly ye failed in duty with regard to Joseph? I will
not quit the land till my father give me leave, or God decide for me; for of
those who decide is He the best.

Return ye to your father and say, 'O our father! Verily, thy son hath stolen:
we bear witness only of what we know: we could not guard against the
unforeseen.

Enquire for thyself in the city where we have been, and of the caravan with
which we have arrived; and we are surely speakers of the truth.'

He said, "Nay, ye have arranged all this among yourselves: But patience is
seemly: God, may be, will bring them back to me together; for he is the
Knowing, the Wise."

And he turned away from them and said, "Oh! how I am grieved for Joseph!" and
his eyes became white with grief, for he bore a silent sorrow.

They said, "By God thou wilt only cease to think of Joseph when thou art at
the point of death, or dead."

He said, "I only plead my grief and my sorrow to God: but I know from God
what ye know not:22

Go, my sons, and seek tidings of Joseph and his brother, and despair not of
God's mercy, for none but the unbelieving despair of the mercy of God."

And when they came in to Joseph, they said, "O Prince, distress hath reached
us and our family, and little is the money that we have brought. But give us
full measure, and bestow it as alms, for God will recompense the almsgivers."

He said, "Know ye what ye did to Joseph and his brother in your ignorance?"

They said, "Canst thou indeed be Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and this is
my brother. Now hath God been gracious to us. For whoso feareth God and
endureth. . . .  God verily will not suffer the reward of the righteous to
perish!"

They said, "By God! now hath God chosen thee above us, and we have indeed
been sinners!"

He said, "No blame be on you this day. God will forgive you, for He is the
most merciful of those who shew mercy.

Go ye with this my shirt and throw it on my father's face, and he shall
recover his sight: and bring me all your family."

And when the caravan was departed, their father said, "I surely perceive the
smell of Joseph:23 think ye that I dote?"

They said, "By God, it is thy old mistake."

And when the bearer of good tidings came, he cast it on his face, and Jacob's
eyesight returned."

Then he said, "Did I not tell you that I knew from God what ye knew not?"

They said, "Our father, ask pardon for our crimes for us, for we have indeed
been sinners."

He said, "I will ask your pardon of my Lord, for he is Gracious, Merciful."

And when they came into Joseph he took his parents24 to him, and said, "Enter
ye Egypt, if God will, secure."

And he raised his parents to the seat of state, and they fell down bowing
themselves unto him. Then said he, "O my father, this is the meaning of my
dream of old. My Lord hath now made it true, and he hath surely been gracious
to me, since he took me forth from the prison, and hath brought you up out of
the desert, after that Satan had stirred up strife between me and my
brethren; for my Lord is gracious to whom He will; for He is the Knowing, the
Wise.

O my Lord, thou hast given me dominion, and hast taught me to expound dark
sayings. Maker of the Heavens and of the Earth! My guardian art thou in this
world and in the next! Cause thou me to die a Muslim, and join me with the
just."

This is one of the secret histories25 which we reveal unto thee. Thou wast
not present with Joseph's brethren when they conceived their design and laid
their plot: but the greater part of men, though thou long for it, will not
believe.

Thou shalt not ask of them any recompense for this message. It is simply an
instruction for all mankind.

And many as are the signs in the Heavens and on the Earth, yet they will pass
them by, and turn aside from them:

And most of them believe not in God, without also joining other deities with
Him.

What! Are they sure that the overwhelming chastisement of God shall not come
upon them, or that that Hour shall not come upon them suddenly, while they
are unaware?

SAY: This is my way: resting on a clear proof, I call you to God, I and whoso
followeth me: and glory be to God! I am not one of those who add other
deities to Him.

Never before thee have we sent any but men, chosen out of the people of the
cities, to whom we made revelations. Will they not journey through the land,
and see what hath been the end of those who were before them? But the
mansions of the next life shall be better for those who fear God. Will they
not then comprehend?

When at last the Apostles lost all hope, and deemed that they were reckoned
as liars, our aid reached them, and we delivered whom we would; but our
vengeance was not averted from the wicked.

Certainly in their histories is an example for men of understanding. This is
no new tale of fiction, but a confirmation of previous scriptures, and an
explanation of all things, and guidance and mercy to those who believe.


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. p. 32. In no other Sura beside this is one subject treated
of throughout. It was recited to the first eight of the Ansars who were
converted, and clearly proves that Muhammad must have been in confidential
intercourse with learned Jews.

2 The word Koran is here used in the same sense as Sura.

3 Muhammad was either unaware of the previous dream mentioned, Gen. xxxvii.
7, or passes it by in silence.

4 The captious and unbelieving Koreisch.

5 Wir mussten denn zuerst das Leben einb√ºssen. Wahl. Ullm. Maracci.

6 Lit. your minds have made a thing seem pleasant to you.

7 According to Gen. xxxvii. 24, the well or pit had "no water in it.

8 Some take the Arabic Boshra as the proper name of the person who
accompanied the drawer of water.

9 The apparition of his father, who said, "Hereafter shall the names of thy
brethren, engraven on precious stones, shine on the breast of the High
Priest. Shall thine be blotted out?" Tr. Sotah, fol. 36. Comp. Weil,
Legenden, p. 109, n.

10 Lit. that he be imprisoned.

11 An infant in the cradle. Sepher Hadjascher, as below on v. 31.

12 Instead of their food, through surprise at his beauty. Seph. Hadj. in
Midr. Jalkut. See also Midr. Abkhir, ib. ch. 146.

13 It is curious to observe how Muhammad, in this and the following verse,
puts his own doctrine and convictions into the mouth of Joseph.

14 Satan induced Joseph to place his confidence in man, rather than in God
alone, in punishment of which sin the imprisonment was continued. Thus Midr.
Rabba. Gen. Par. 89. Midr. Jalkut, ib. ch. 147.

15 In Gen. xli. 14, Joseph is released from prison before the interpretation
of the dreams. But the Koran makes him decline to quit it till his character
is cleared.

16 According to Gen. xli. 39, Pharaoh of his own accord sets Joseph over his
house and land.

17 For the king to bestow.

18 Thus we read in Mid. Rab. on Gen. Par. 91, "Jacob said to them, Enter ye
not all by one gate." See also Midr. Jalkut, ch. 148.

19 Thus also, in the Sepher Hadjaschar, Joseph first discovers himself to
Benjamin, in opposition to Gen. xlv. 1.

20 Comp. Gen. xlii. 9.

21 Joseph is said by the Muhammadan commentators to have stolen an idol of
gold belonging to his mother's father, which he broke, that he might not
worship it. But this comment, as well as the text of the Koran, is probably
based upon some such tradition as that of Midr. Rabba, Par. 92, "He is a
thief and the son of a thief" (Comp. Gen. xxxi. 19)-spoken of Benjamin.

22 That is, that Joseph was still alive. Thus Midr. Tanchumah on Gen. xlii.
1.

23 Comp. Gen. xxvii. 27.

24 Joseph's mother had long been dead. See Gen. xxxv. 19. But the object of
Muhammad was probably to bring the event into strict accordance with the
prediction of the dream. Gen. xxxvii. 10. Some, however, suppose that Bilhah
is here meant, and her appearance before Joseph is also asserted to be the
fulfilment of the dream by some of the Rabbins. Comp. Raschi on Gen. xxxvii.
10.

25 Lit. This is of the announcements of the things unseen (by thee,
Muhammad). Compare the manner in which the story of the Creation and of Moses
in the mount is introduced. Sura xxxviii. 70; xxviii. 45. Mr. Muir thinks
that Muhammad must at this period, while recasting and working up these
materials, have entered upon a course of wilful dissimulation and deceit
(although the end would justify to him the means employed) in claiming
inspiration for them.


SURA XL.-THE BELIEVER [LXXVIII.]

MECCA.-85 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HA. MIM. The Revelation (sending down) of the Book is from God the Almighty,
the All-knowing,1

Forgiver of sin, and receiver of penitence,-vehement in chastisement,

Long-suffering! There is no God but He: to Him shall be the final gathering.

None but infidels gainsay the signs of God: but let not their prosperity in
the land deceive thee.

The people of Noah, and the confederates after them, have brought the charge
of imposture before these Meccans: each nation schemed against their apostle
to lay violent hold on him, and disputed with vain words to refute the truth.
Therefore did I lay violent hold on them; and how great was my chastisement!

Thus is it that thy Lord's sentence, that inmates shall they be of the fire,
was accomplished upon the infidels.

They who bear the throne2 and they who encircle it, celebrate the praise of
their Lord and believe in Him, and implore forgiveness for the believers:-"O
our Lord! thou embracest all things in mercy and knowledge; forgive,
therefore, those who turn to thee and follow thy path; keep them from the
pains of hell:

O our Lord! and bring them into the Gardens of Eden which thou hast promised
to them, and to the righteous ones of their fathers and their wives and their
children; for thou art the All-mighty, the All-wise:

And keep them from evil: for on him hast thou mercy whom on that day thou
shalt keep from evil;" and this will be the great felicity.

But to the infidels shall a voice cry, "Surely the hatred of God is more
grievous than your hatred of yourselves, when ye were called to the faith,
and remained unbelievers."

They shall say, "Twice, O our Lord, hast thou given us death, and twice hast
thou given us life:3 and we acknowledge our sins: is there no way to escape?"

"This hath befallen you, for that when One God was proclaimed to you, ye
believed not: but when partners had been united with him, ye believed: But
judgment belongeth unto God, the High, the Great."

It is He who sheweth you his signs, and sendeth down supplies to you from
Heaven: but none will receive warning save he who turneth to God.

Call then on God, offering him a pure worship, though the infidels abhor it.

Of exalted grade, of the throne possessed, He sendeth forth the Spirit at His
own behest on whomsoever of His servants He pleaseth, that He may warn of the
day of meeting,

The day when they shall come forth from their graves, when nought that
concerneth them shall be hidden from God. With whom shall be the power
supreme on that day? With God, the One, the Almighty.

On that day shall every soul be recompensed as it hath deserved: no injustice
on that day! Verily, God will be swift to reckon.

Warn them, then, of the approaching day, when men's hearts shall rise up,
choking them, into their throats.

The evil-doers shall have no friend or intercessor who shall prevail.

God knoweth the deceitful of eye, and what men's breasts conceal.

And everything will God decide with truth: But nothing shall those gods whom
men call on beside him, decide. Verily, God! the Hearer, the Beholder, He!

Have they never journeyed in this land, and seen what hath been the end of
those who flourished before them? Mightier were they in strength than these
Meccans, and their traces remain in the land: Yet God took them in their
sins, and there was none to defend them against God.

This, because their apostles had come to them with proofs of their mission,
and they believed not: so God took them in hand; for He is mighty, vehement
in punishing.

Moreover we had sent Moses of old with our signs and with clear authority.

To Pharaoh, and Haman, and Karun:4 and they said, "Sorcerer, impostor."

And when he came to them from our presence with the truth, they said, "Slay
the sons of those who believe as he doth, and save their females alive;" but
the stratagem of the unbelievers issued only in failure.

And Pharaoh said, "Let me alone, that I may kill Moses; and let him call upon
his Lord: I fear lest he change your religion, or cause disorder to shew
itself in the land."

And Moses said, "I take refuge with my Lord and your Lord from every proud
one who believeth not in the day of reckoning."

And a man of the family of Pharaoh, who was a BELIEVER,5 but hid his faith,
said, "Will ye slay a man because he saith my Lord is God, when he hath
already come to you with proofs of his mission from your Lord? and if he be a
liar, on him will be his lie:6 but if he be a man of truth, part at least of
what he threateneth will fall upon you. Truly God guideth not him who is a
transgressor, a liar.

O my people! this day is the kingdom yours, the eminent of the earth! but who
shall defend us from the vengeance of God if it come on us?" Pharaoh said, "I
would have you see only what I see; and in a right way only will I guide
you."

Then said he who believed, "O my people! truly I fear for you the like of the
day of the allies,7

The like of the state of the people of Noah and Ad and Themoud,

And of those who came after them; yet God willeth not injustice to his
servants.

And, O my people! I indeed fear for you the day of mutual outcry-

The day when ye shall be turned back from the Judgment into hell. No
protector shall ye have then against God. And he whom God shall mislead no
guide shall there be for him.

Moreover, Joseph had come to you before with clear tokens, but ye ceased not
to doubt of the message with which he came to you, until when he died, ye
said, 'God will by no means raise up an apostle after him.' " Thus God
misleadeth him who is the transgressor, the doubter.

They who gainsay the signs of God without authority having come to them, are
greatly hated by God and by those who believe. Thus God sealeth up every
proud, contumacious heart.

And Pharaoh said, "O Haman,8 Build for me a tower that I may reach the
avenues,

The avenues of the heavens, and may mount to the God of Moses, for I verily
deem him a liar."

And thus the evil of his doings was made fair-seeming to Pharaoh, and he
turned away from the path of truth; but the artifice of Pharaoh ended only in
his ruin.

And he who believed said, "O my people! follow me: into the right way will I
guide you.

O my people! this present life is only a passing joy, but the life to come is
the mansion that abideth.

Whoso shall have wrought evil shall not be recompensed but with its like; but
whoso shall have done the things that are right, whether male or female, and
is a believer-these shall enter paradise: good things unreckoned shall they
enjoy therein.

And, O my people! how is it that I bid you to salvation, but that ye bid me
to the fire?

Ye invite me to deny God, and to join with him gods of whom I know nothing;
but I invite you to the Mighty, the Forgiving.

No doubt is there that they to whom ye invite me are not to be invoked either
in this world or in the world to come: and that unto God is our return, and
that the transgressors shall be the inmates of the fire.

Then shall ye remember what I am saying unto you: and to God commit I my
case: Verily, God beholdeth his servants."

So God preserved him from the evils which they had planned, and the woe of
the punishment encompassed the people of Pharaoh.

It is the fire to which they shall be exposed morning and evening, and on the
day when "the Hour" shall arrive-"Bring in the people of Pharaoh into the
severest punishment."

And when they shall wrangle together in the fire, the weak shall say to those
who had borne themselves so proudly, "It is you we followed: will ye
therefore relieve us from aught of the fire?"

And those proud ones shall say, "Verily we are all in it; for now hath God
judged between his servants."

And they who are in the fire shall say to the keepers of Hell, "Implore your
Lord that he would give us ease but for one day from this torment."

They shall say, "Came not your apostles to you with the tokens?" They shall
say, "Yes." They shall say, "Cry ye then aloud for help:" but the cry of the
unbelievers shall be only in vain.

Assuredly, in this present life will we succour our apostles and those who
shall have believed, and on the day when the witnesses shall stand forth;

A day whereon the plea of the evil doers shall not avail them; but theirs
shall be a curse, and theirs the woe of the abode in Hell.

And of old gave we Moses the guidance, and we made the children of Israel the
heritors of the Book,-a guidance and warning to men endued with
understanding.

Therefore be steadfast thou and patient; for true is the promise of God: and
seek pardon for thy fault,9 and celebrate the praise of thy Lord at evening
and at morning.

As to those who cavil at the signs of God without authority having reached
them, nought is there but pride in their breasts: but they shall not succeed.
Fly thou for refuge then to God, for He is the Hearer, the Beholder.

Greater surely than the creation of man is the creation of the heavens and of
the earth: but most men know it not.

Moreover, the blind and the seeing, and the evil doer and they who believe
and do the things that are right, shall not be deemed equal. How few ponder
this!

Aye, "the Hour" will surely come: there is no doubt of it: but most men
believe it not.

And your Lord saith, "Call upon me-I will hearken unto you: but they who turn
in disdain from my service shall enter Hell with shame."

It is God who hath ordained the night for your rest, and the day to give you
light: verily God is rich in bounties to men: but most men render not the
tribute of thanks.

This is God your Lord, Creator of all things: no god is there but He: why
then do ye turn away from Him?

Yet thus are they turned aside who gainsay the signs of God.

It is God who hath given you the earth as a sure foundation, and over it
built up the Heaven, and formed you, and made your forms beautiful, and
feedeth you with good things. This is God your Lord. Blessed then be God the
Lord of the Worlds!

He is the Living One. No God is there but He. Call then upon Him and offer
Him a pure worship. Praise be to God the Lord of the Worlds!

SAY: Verily I am forbidden to worship what ye call on beside God, after that
the clear tokens have come to me from my Lord, and I am bidden to surrender
myself to the Lord of the Worlds.

He it is who created you of the dust, then of the germs of life, then of
thick blood, then brought you forth infants: then he letteth you reach your
full strength, and then become old men (but some of you die first), and reach
the ordained term. And this that haply ye may understand.

It is He who giveth life and death; and when He decreeth a thing, He only
saith of it, "Be," and it is.

Seest thou not those who cavil at the signs of God? how are they turned
aside!

They who treat "the Book," and the message with which we have sent our Sent
Ones, as a lie, shall know the truth hereafter,

When the collars shall be on their necks and the chains to drag them into
Hell: then in the fire shall they be burned.

Then shall it be said to them, "Where are they whom ye made the objects of
joint worship with God?" They shall say, "They have vanished away from us.
Yea, it was nought on which we called heretofore." Thus God leadeth the
unbelievers astray.

-"This for you, because of your unrighteous insolence and immoderate joys on
earth.

Enter ye the portals of Hell to abide therein for ever. And, wretched the
abode of the haughty ones!"

Therefore be thou steadfast in patience: for the promise of God is truth: and
whether we shall make thee see part of the woes with which we threatened
them, or whether we cause thee first to die, unto us shall they be brought
back.

And we have already sent apostles before thee: of some we have told thee, and
of others we have told thee nothing:10 but no apostle had the power to work a
miracle unless by the leave of God. But when God's behest cometh, everything
will be decided with truth: and then they perish who treated it as a vain
thing.

It is God who hath given you the cattle that on some of them ye may ride, and
of some may eat:

(Other advantages too do ye derive from them)-and that by them ye may effect
the projects ye cherish in your breasts; for on them, and on ships are ye
borne:

And He sheweth you His signs: which, then, of the signs of God will ye deny?

Have they not journeyed in this land, and seen what hath been the end of
those who flourished before them? More were they than these in number and
mightier in strength, and greater are the traces of their power remaining in
the land:11 yet their labours availed them nothing.

And when their apostles had come to them with the tokens of their mission,
they exulted in what they possessed of knowledge; but that retribution at
which they scoffed, encompassed them.

And when they beheld our vengeance they said, "We believe in God alone, and
we disbelieve in the deities we once associated with Him."

But their faith, after they had witnessed our vengeance, profited them not.
Such the procedure of God with regard to his servants who flourished of old.
And then the unbelievers perished.


_______________________

1 See Sura 1xviii. 1, p. 32.

2 The Cherubic beings of Scripture are said to be above the throne of God
(Is. vi. 1), beneath it (Ezek. x.); and the mystical beasts in the
Revelations are said to be in the midst of the throne and round about it.

3 Probably the union of life and death in the womb, and the subsequent life
followed by death.

4 See Sura [lxxix.] xxviii. 76.

5 Thus Sura [lxxix.] xxviii 20, and Sura [lx.] xxxvi. 19, we have a similar
character introduced into the narrative.

6 Comp. Acts v. 38, 39.

7 These tribes no doubt constantly formed temporary alliances. Muhammad
implies that they were confederate against their prophets.

8 Haman, the favourite of Ahasuerus and the enemy of the Jews, is thus made
the vizier of Pharaoh. The Rabbins make this vizier to have been Korah,
Jethro, or Balaam. Midr. Jalkut on Ex. ch. 1, Sect. 162-168; and Tr. Solah,
fol. 11. See Sura [lxxix.] xxviii. 5.

9 Thy remissness in propagating Islam. Beidh.

10 It is possible that Muhammad, conscious of his ignorance of Jewish
history, intends in this verse to screen himself from the charge of passing
over the histories of many of their prophets.

11 The wealth of Mecca, although it still numbered about 12,000 inhabitants
(as well as of Arabia generally), had much declined at the time of Muhammad,
owing mainly to the navigation of the Red Sea, under the Roman dominion over
Egypt, which of course impoverished the tribes situated on the line of the
old mercantile route southward. Mecca, however, was still to a certain extent
prosperous. Comp. Sura [lxi.] xliii. 28.


SURA XXVIII.-THE STORY [LXXIX.]

MECCA.-88 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

TA. SIN. MIM.1 These are the signs of the lucid Book.

We will recite to thee portions of the History of Moses and Pharaoh with
truth, for the teaching of the faithful.

Now Pharaoh lifted himself up in the earth, and divided his people into
parties: one portion of them he brought low-He slew their male children, and
let their females only live; for he was one of those who wrought disorders.

And we were minded to shew favour to those who were brought low in the land,
and to make them spiritual chiefs,2 and to make them Pharaoh's heirs,

And to stablish them in the land;3 and to make Pharaoh and Haman and their
hosts, the eye-witnesses of what they dreaded from them.

And we said by revelation to the mother of Moses, "Give him suck; and if thou
fearest for him, launch him on the sea; and fear not, neither fret; for we
will restore him to thee, and make him one of the apostles."

And Pharaoh's family took him up to be a foe and a sorrow to them, for
sinners were Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts!

And Pharaoh's wife said, "Joy of the eye4 to me and thee! put him not to
death: haply he will be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." But they
knew not what they did.

And the heart of Moses' mother became a blank through fear: and almost had
she discovered him, but that we girt up her heart with constancy, in order
that she might be one of those who believe.

She said to his sister, "Follow him." And she watched him from afar: and they
perceived it not.

And we caused him to refuse the nurses,5 until his sister came and said,
Shall I point out to you the family of a house that will rear him for you,
and will be careful of him?

So we restored him to his mother, to be the joy of her eyes, and that she
might not fret, and that she might know that the promise of God was true. But
most men knew it not.

And when he had reached his age of strength, and had become a man, we
bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge; for thus do we reward the righteous.

And he entered a city at the time when its inhabitants would not observe
him,6 and found therein two men fighting: the one, of his own people; the
other, of his enemies. And he who was of his own people asked his help
against him who was of his enemies. And Moses smote him with his fist and
slew him. Said he, "This is a work of Satan; for he is an enemy, a manifest
misleader."

He said, "O my Lord, I have sinned to mine own hurt:7 forgive me." So God
forgave him; for He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

He said, "Lord, because thou hast showed me this grace, I will never again be
the helper of the wicked."

And in the city at noon he was full of fear, casting furtive glances round
him: and lo! the man whom he had helped the day before, cried out to him
again for help. Said Moses to him, "Thou art plainly a most depraved person."

And when he would have laid violent hands on him who was their common foe, he
said to him, "O Moses, dost thou desire to slay me, as thou slayedst a man
yesterday? Thou desirest only to become a tyrant in this land, and desirest
not to become a peacemaker."

But a man came running up from the city's end. He said, "O Moses, of a truth,
the nobles consult to slay thee-Begone then-I counsel thee as a friend."

So forth he went from it in fear, looking warily about him. He said, "O Lord,
deliver me from the unjust people."

And when he was journeying toward Madian, he said, "Haply my Lord will direct
me in an even path."

And when he arrived at the water of Madian, he found at it a company of men
watering.

And he found beside them, two women8 keeping back their flock: "Why do ye,"
said he, "thus?" They said "We shall not water till the shepherds shall have
driven off; for our father is very aged."

So he watered for them-then retired to the shade and said, "O my Lord, of the
good thou hast caused me to meet with I stand in need."9

And one of them came to him, walking bashfully. Said she, "My father calleth
thee, that he may pay thee wages for thy watering for us." And when he came
to him and had told him his STORY, "Fear not," said he, "thou hast escaped
from an unjust people."

One of them said, "O my father, hire him: for the best thou canst hire is the
strong, the trusty."

He said, "Truly to one of these my two daughters I desire to marry thee, if
for eight years thou wilt be my hired servant:10 and if thou fulfil ten, it
shall be of thine own accord, for I wish not to deal hardly with thee. Thou
wilt find me, if God will, one of the upright."

He said, "Be it so between me and thee: Whichever of the two terms I fulfil,
there will be no injustice to me. And God is witness of what we say."

And when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was journeying with his family, he
perceived a fire on the mountain side. He said to his family, "Wait ye, for I
perceive a fire. Haply I may bring you tidings from it, or a brand from the
fire to warm you."

And when he came up to it, a Voice cried to him11 out of the bush from the
right side of the valley in the sacred hollow, "O Moses, I truly am God, the
Lord of the Worlds:

Throw down now thy rod." And when he saw it move as though it were a serpent,
he retreated and fled and returned not. "O Moses," cried the Voice, "draw
near and fear not, for thou art in safety.

Put thy hand into thy bosom; it shall come forth white, but unharmed: and
draw back thy hand12 to thee without fear. These shall be two signs from thy
Lord to Pharaoh and his nobles; for they are a perverse people."

He said, "O my Lord! truly I have slain one of them, therefore fear I lest
they slay me.

My brother Aaron is clearer of speech than I. Send him, therefore, with me as
a help, and to make good my cause, for I fear lest they treat me as an
impostor."

He said, "We will strengthen thine arm with thy brother, and we will give
power unto you both, and they shall not equal you in our signs. Ye twain and
they who shall follow you, shall gain the day."

And when Moses came to him with our demonstrative signs they said, "This is
nought but magical device. We never heard the like among our sires of old."

And Moses said, "My Lord best knoweth on whom He hath bestowed His guidance,
and whose shall be the recompense of the abode of Paradise. Verily, the
wicked shall not prosper."

And Pharaoh said, "O ye nobles, ye have no other God that I know of but
myself. Burn me then, Haman, bricks of clay,13 and build me a tower that I
may mount up to the God of Moses, for in sooth, I deem him a liar."

And he and his hosts behaved themselves proudly and unjustly on the earth,
and thought that they should never be brought back to us.

But we seized on him and his hosts and cast them into the sea: Behold, then,
the end of the wrongful doers:

And we made them im√¢ms who invite to the fire of hell, and on the day of
Resurrection they shall not be helped.

We followed them with a curse in this world, and covered shall they be with
shame on the day of Resurrection.

And after we had destroyed the former generations, we gave the book of the
Law to Moses for man's enlightening, and a guidance and a mercy, that haply
they might reflect.

And thou wast not on the western slope of Sinai when we laid his charge on
Moses, nor wast thou one of the witnesses;

But we raised up generations after Moses, men whose days were lengthened;14
neither didst thou dwell among the inhabitants of Madian to rehearse to them
our signs, but we sent Apostles to them.15

Nor wast thou on the slope of Sinai when we called to Moses, but it is of the
mercy of thy Lord that thou warnest a people, to whom no warner had come
before thee, to the intent that they should reflect:

And that they should not say when a calamity shall befal them for their
previous handy work, "O our Lord! why hast thou not sent an Apostle to us?
Then we should have followed thy signs and have been of the believers."

Yet when the truth came to them from our very presence, they said, "Unless
the like powers be given to him that were given to Moses. . . ."16 But did
they not disbelieve in what of old was given to Moses? They said, "Two works
of sorcery17 have helped each other;" and they said, "We disbelieve them
both."

SAY: Bring then a Book from before God which shall be a better guide than
these, that I may follow it; if ye speak the truth.

And if they answer thee not, then know that verily they are following their
own caprices: and who goeth more widely astray than he who followeth his own
caprice without guidance from God? for God guideth not the wicked.

And now have we caused our word to come unto them, that they may be warned:

They18 to whom we gave the Scriptures before IT, do in IT believe.

And when it is recited to them they say, "We believe in it, for it is the
truth from our Lord. We were Muslims before it came."

Twice shall their reward be given them, for that they suffered with patience,
and repelled evil with good, and gave alms out of that with which we provided
them.

And when they hear light discourse they withdraw from it, and say, "Our works
for us and your works for you! Peace be on you! We are not in quest of
fools!"

Thou truly canst not guide whom thou desirest; but God guideth whom He will;
and He best knoweth those who yield to guidance.

But they say, "If we follow the way in which thou art guided,19 we shall be
driven from our country." But have we not established for them a sacred
secure precinct, to which fruits of every kind, our gift for their support,
are gathered together? But most of them have no knowledge.

And how many cities have we destroyed that flourished in wanton ease! And
these their dwellings have not been inhabited since their time save by a few,
and it is we who became their heirs.

But thy Lord did not destroy the cities till He had sent an apostle to their
mother-city to rehearse our signs to its people: nor did we destroy the
cities unless its people were unjust.

And all that hath been bestowed on you is merely for enjoyment and pomp of
this life present: but that which is with God is better and more lasting.
Will ye not be wise?

Shall he then to whom we have promised a goodly promise and who obtaineth it,
be as he on whom we have bestowed the enjoyments of this life present, and
who on the day of Resurrection shall be brought up for punishment?

On that day will God cry to them and say, "Where are my companions, as ye
supposed them?"

They on whom doom shall be justly pronounced will say, "O our Lord! these are
they whom we led astray: we led them astray even as we had been led astray
ourselves: Thou hast no cause of blame against us: It was not we whom they
worshipped.20

And it shall be said, "Call now on those whom ye made God's companions:" and
they shall call on them, but they will not answer them. And they shall see
the punishment, and wish that they had been guided aright.

And on that day shall God call to them and say, "How answered ye the
apostles?"

But on that day they shall be too blinded with confusion to give an
account,21 nor shall they ask it of one another.

Yet as to him who shall turn to God and believe and do the thing that is
right, it may come to pass that he shall be among the happy.

And thy Lord createth what he will and hath a free choice. But they, the
false gods, have no power to choose. Glory be to God! and high let him be
exalted above those whom they associate with him.

And thy Lord knoweth what their breasts conceal and what they bring to light.

And He is God! There is no god but He! His, all praise in this life and in
the next, and His the power supreme,22 and to Him shall ye be brought back!

SAY: What think ye? If God should enshroud you with a long night until the
day of resurrection, what god beside God would bring you light? Will ye not
then hearken?

SAY: What think ye? If God should make it one long day for you until the day
of resurrection, what god but God could bring you the night in which to take
your rest? Will ye not then see?

Of His mercy he hath made for you the night that ye may take your rest in it;
and the day that ye may seek what ye need out of his bounteous supplies, and
that ye may give thanks.

One day God will call to them and say, "Where are my companions as ye
supposed them?

And we will bring up a witness out of every nation and say, "Bring your
proofs." And they shall know that the truth is with God alone, and the gods
of their own devising shall desert them.

Now Korah23 was of the people of Moses: but he behaved haughtily toward them;
for we had given him such treasure that its keys would have burdened a
company of men of strength. When his people said to him, "Exult not, for God
loveth not those who exult;

But seek, by means of what God hath given thee, to attain the future Mansion;
and neglect not thy part in this world, but be bounteous to others as God
hath been bounteous to thee, and seek not to commit excesses on the earth;
for God loveth not those who commit excesses:"

He said, "It hath been given me only on account of the knowledge that is in
me." Did he not know that God had destroyed before him generations that were
mightier than he in strength and had amassed more abundant wealth? But the
wicked shall not be asked of their crimes.

And Korah went forth to his people in his pomp. Those who were greedy for
this present life said, "Oh that we had the like of that which hath been
bestowed on Korah! Truly he is possessed of great good fortune."

But they to whom knowledge had been given said, "Woe to you! the reward of
God is better for him who believeth and worketh righteousness, and none shall
win it but those who have patiently endured."

And we clave the earth for him and for his palace, and he had no forces, in
the place of God,24 to help him, nor was he among those who are succoured.

And in the morning those who the day before had coveted his lot said, "Aha!
God enlargeth supplies to whom he pleaseth of his servants, or is sparing.
Had not God been gracious to us, He had caused it to cleave for us. Aha! the
ungrateful can never prosper."

As to this future mansion, we will bestow it on those who seek not to exalt
them in the earth or to do wrong: And there is a happy issue for the God-
fearing.

Whoso doeth good shall have reward beyond its merits, and whoso doeth evil,
they who do evil shall be rewarded only as they shall have wrought.

He who hath sanctioned the Koran to thee will certainly bring thee to thy
home.25 SAY: My Lord best knoweth who hath guidance, and who is in undoubted
error.

Thou didst never expect that the Book would be given thee. Of thy Lord's
mercy only hath it been sent down. Be not thou helpful then to the
unbelievers:

Neither let them turn thee aside from the signs of God after they have been
sent down to thee, but bid men to thy Lord; and be not among those who add
gods to God:

And call not on any other god with God. There is no god but He! Everything
shall perish except Himself! Judgment is His, and to Him shall ye return!


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. 1, p. 32.

2 Lit. Im√¢ms.

3 Comp. [xci.] ii. 58.

4 That is, This child will be a comfort to us. See Sura [lviii.] xix. 26.

5 "Why must the nurse be a Hebrew woman? (Ex. ii. 7.) This shews that he
refused the breast of all the Egyptian women. For the Holy, blessed be He,
had said, Shall the mouth that is to speak with me suck an unclean thing?"
Sotah. xii. 2.

6 Lit. in the time of neglect on the part of its people, i.e. at the hour of
the noon sleep.

7 Lit. I have acted unjustly to my soul.

8 Comp. Ex. ii. 16, 17, where the daughters are said to be seven.

9 That is, of a wife.

10 The compact (Gen. xxix. 15-39) between Laban and Jacob must have been
present to the mind of Muhammad when composing this tale.

11 Lit. he was cried to. According to Muhammad, Moses had resolved to quit
Madian previously to the Vision of the Bush, which, according to Ex. iii.,
was the real occasion.

12 Lit. thy wing.

13 Lit. kindle upon the clay. Comp. [lxxviii.] xl. 38-49. "He (Pharaoh) said
to them: From the first have ye spoken an untruth, for Lord of the Worlds am
I. I created myself and the Nile, as it is said (Ez. xxix. 3), 'My river is
mine own and I have made it for myself."' (E.T.) Mid. Rab. on Ex. Par. 5.

14 So that the oral traditions would be easily handed down.

15 Or, yet have we sent thee as an Apostle to them.

16 Supply, we will not believe.

17 That is, the Pentateuch and the Koran.

18 The Meccan Jews and Christians who had formerly embraced Islam, and could
now affirm that they had always held the same faith. This passage could not
have been written after Muhammad's experience of Jewish unbelief at Medina.

19 Lit. the guidance with thee.

20 But their own imaginations and passions.

21 Lit. the account shall be blind or dark to them. Sie werden vor Best√ºrzung
keine Rechenschaft geben. Ullm.

22 Potestas judiciaria. Mar. Richteramt. Ullm.

23 Ar. Karun. "Joseph concealed three treasures in Egypt, one of which became
known to Korah . . . the keys of Korah's treasure chambers were a burden for
300 white mules." Midr. Jalkut on Eccl. v. 12, "Riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt,"-which may have furnished Muhammad with the nucleus of
this story. Compare also Tract. Psachim. fol. 119 a.

24 Or, against God.

25 Probably to Paradise, according to others to Mecca, as a conqueror. But
this latter interpretation involves the revelation of this verse at least, at
Medina.


SURA XXXIX.-THE TROOPS [LXXX.]

MECCA.-75 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

THE Book1 sent down from God, the Mighty, the Wise!

We have sent down the Book to thee with the truth: serve thou God then, and
be sincere in thy worship:

Is not a sincere worship due to God?

But they who take others beside him as lords saying, "We serve them only that
they may bring us near to God"-God will judge between them and the faithful,
concerning that wherein they are at variance.

Verily God will not guide him who is a liar, an infidel.

Had God desired to have had a son, he had surely chosen what he pleased out
of his own creation. But praise be to Him! He is God, the One, the Almighty.

For truth2 hath he created the Heavens and the Earth: It is of Him that the
night returneth upon the day and that the day returneth upon the night: and
He controlleth the sun and the moon so that each speedeth to an appointed
goal. Is He not the Mighty, the Gracious?

He created you all of one man, from whom He afterwards formed his wife; and
of cattle He hath sent down to you four pairs.3 In the wombs of your mothers
did He create you by creation upon creation in triple darkness. It is He who
is God your Lord: the kingdom is His: There is no God but He. How then are ye
so turned aside from Him?

Suppose ye render him no thanks! yet forsooth is God rich without you: but He
is not pleased with thanklessness in His servants: yet if ye be thankful He
will be pleased with you. The soul burdened with its own works shall not be
burdened with the burden of another: hereafter shall ye return to your Lord,
and he will tell you of all your works,

For he knoweth the very secrets of your breasts.

When some trouble toucheth a man, he turneth to his Lord and calleth on him:
yet no sooner hath He enriched him with his favour than he forgetteth Him on
whom he before had called, and setteth up peers with God, that he may beguile
others from His way. SAY: Enjoy thou thyself yet a little in thine
ingratitude! but thou shalt surely be one of the inmates of the fire.

Shall he who observeth the hours of the night, prostrate or standing in
devotion, heedful of the life to come, and hoping for the mercy of his Lord .
. .? SAY: Shall they who have knowledge and they who have it not, be treated
alike? In sooth, men of understanding only will take the warning.

SAY: O my believing servants, fear your Lord. For those who do good in this
world there is good: and broad is God's earth4-verily those who endure with
patience shall be repaid: their reward shall not be by measure.

SAY: I am bidden to serve God with a sincere worship: and I am bidden to be
the first of those who surrender themselves to him (Muslims).

SAY: Verily I fear if I rebel against my Lord the punishment of a great day.

SAY: God will I serve, presenting him with a sincere worship:

And serve ye what ye choose beside Him. SAY: The losers truly will they be
who shall lose their own souls and their families on the day of resurrection:
Is not this the clear ruin?

Canopies of fire shall be over them, and floors of fire beneath them. With
this doth God alarm his servants: Fear ye me, then, O my servants!

But good tidings are there for those who shun the worship of Thagout and are
turned to God. Cheer then with good tidings those my servants who hearken to
my word and follow its excellence. These are they whom God guideth, and these
are men of insight.

Him then on whom the sentence of punishment hath justly lighted-him who is
doomed to the fire canst thou rescue?

But for those who fear their Lord are storied pavilions beneath which shall
the rivers flow: it is the promise of God, and God will not fail in his
promise.

Seest thou not that God sendeth down water from heaven, and guideth it along
so as to form springs in the earth-then bringeth forth by it corn of varied
sorts-then causeth he it to wither, and thou seest it become yellow-then
crumbleth it away? Lo! herein is teaching for men of insight.

Shall he then whose breast God hath opened to Islam, and who hath light from
his Lord . . .? But woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the
remembrance of God! They plainly err.

The best of recitals hath God sent down a book in unison with itself, and
teaching by iteration.5 The very skins of those who fear their Lord do creep
at it! Then do their skins and their hearts soften at the remembrance of
their Lord! This is God's guidance: by it will He guide whom He pleaseth;
and, whom God shall mislead, no guide shall there be for him.

Shall he who shall have nought but his own face to shelter him with from the
torment of the punishment on the day of the resurrection . . .? Aye, to the
evil doers it shall be said, "Taste what ye have earned."

They who were before them said it was a lie; but a punishment came upon them
whence they looked not for it:

And God made them taste humiliation in this present life: but greater surely
will be the punishment of the life to come. Did they but know it!

Now have we set before man in this Koran every kind of parable for their
warning:

An Arabic Koran, free from tortuous wording, to the intent that they may fear
God.

God setteth forth the comparison of a man with associates6 at variance among
themselves, and of a man devoted wholly to a man. Are these to be held alike?
No, praise be to God! But the greater part of them understand not.

Thou truly shall die, O Muhammad, and they too shall die:

Then, at the day of resurrection, ye shall wrangle with one another in the
presence of your Lord.

And who acteth more unjustly than he who lieth of God, and treateth the truth
when it cometh to him as a lie? Is there not a dwelling-place in Hell for the
infidels?

But he who bringeth the truth, and he who believeth it to be the truth: these
are the God-fearing.

Whatever they shall desire, awaiteth them with their Lord! This is the reward
of the righteous;

That God may do away the guilt of their worst actions, and for their best
actions render them their reward.

Is not God all-sufficient for his servant? Yet would they scare thee by their
idols. But no guide shall there be for him whom God misleadeth:

And he whom God guideth shall have none to mislead him. Is not God, all-
mighty, able to revenge?

And if thou ask them who hath created the Heavens and the Earth, they will
surely answer, God. SAY: Think ye, then, that they7 on whom ye call beside
God, if God choose to afflict me, could remove his affliction? or if he
choose to show me mercy, could they withhold His mercy? SAY: God sufficeth
me: in Him let the trusting trust.

SAY: O my people, act your part as best ye can, I too will act mine; and in
the end ye shall know

On whom shall light a punishment that shall shame him, and on whom a lasting
punishment shall fall.

Assuredly we have sent down the Book to thee for man and for the ends of
truth. Whoso shall be guided by it-it will be for his own advantage, and
whoso shall err, shall only err to his own loss. But not to thy keeping are
they entrusted.

God taketh souls unto Himself at death; and during their sleep those who do
not die:8 and he retaineth those on which he hath passed a decree of death,
but sendeth the others back till a time that is fixed. Herein are signs for
the reflecting.

Have they taken aught beside God as intercessors? SAY: What! though they have
no power over anything, neither do they understand?

SAY: Intercession is wholly with God:9 His the kingdom of the Heavens and of
the Earth! To him shall ye be brought back hereafter!

But when the One God is named, the hearts of those who believe not in the
life to come, shrivel up: but when the deities who are adored beside Him are
named, lo! they are filled with joy.

SAY: O God, creator of the Heaven and of the Earth, who knowest the hidden
and the manifest, thou shalt judge between thy servants as to the subject of
their disputes.

If the wicked possessed all that is in the earth and as much again therewith,
verily they would ransom themselves with it from the pain of the punishment
on the day of the resurrection; and there shall appear to them, from God,
things they had never reckoned on:

And their own ill deeds shall be clearly perceived by them, and that fire at
which they mocked shall encircle them on every side.

When trouble befalleth a man he crieth to Us; afterwards, when we have
vouchsafed favour to him, he saith, "God knew that I deserved it."10 Nay, it
is a trial. But the greater part of them knew it not.

The same said those who flourished before them; but their deeds profited them
not.

And their own ill deeds recoiled upon them. And whoso among these (Meccans)
shall do wrong, on them likewise their own misdeeds shall light, neither
shall they invalidate God.

Know they not that God giveth supplies with open hand, and that He is sparing
to whom He will? Of a truth herein are signs to those who believe.

SAY: O my servants who have transgressed to your own hurt,11 despair not of
God's mercy, for all sins doth God forgive. Gracious, Merciful is He!

And return ye to your Lord, and to Him resign yourselves, ere the punishment
come on you, for then ye shall not be helped:

And follow that most excellent thing which hath been sent down to you from
your Lord, ere the punishment come on you suddenly, and when ye look not for
it:

So that a soul say, "Oh misery! for my failures in duty towards God! and
verily I was of those who scoffed:"

Or say, "Had God guided me, I had surely been of those who feared Him:"

Or say, when it seeth the punishment, "Could I but return, then I would be of
the righteous."

Nay! my signs had already come to thee, and thou didst treat them as
untruths, and wast arrogant, and becamest of those who believed not.

And on the resurrection day, thou shalt see those who have lied of God, with
their faces black. Is there not an abode in Hell for the arrogant?

But God shall rescue those who fear him into their safe retreat: no ill shall
touch them, neither shall they be put to grief.

God is the creator of all things, and of all things is He the guardian! His
the keys of the Heavens and of the Earth! and-who believe not in the signs of
God-these! they shall perish!

SAY: What! do ye then bid me worship other than God, O ye ignorant ones?

But now hath it been revealed to thee and to those who flourished before
thee,-"Verily, if thou join partners with God, vain shall be all thy work,
and thyself shalt be of those who perish.

Nay, rather worship God! and be of those who render thanks."

But they have not deemed of God as is His due;12 for on the resurrection day
the whole Earth shall be but his handful, and in his right hand shall the
Heavens be folded together. Praise be to Him! and high be He uplifted above
the partners they join with Him!

And there shall be a blast on the trumpet, and all who are in the Heavens and
all who are in the Earth shall expire, save those whom God shall vouchsafe to
live. Then shall there be another blast on it, and lo! arising they shall
gaze around them:

And the earth shall shine with the light of her Lord, and the Book shall be
set, and the prophets shall be brought up, and the witnesses; and judgment
shall be given between them with equity; and none shall be wronged:

And every soul shall receive as it shall have wrought, for well knoweth He
men's actions.

And by TROOPS shall the unbelievers be driven towards Hell, until when they
reach it, its gates shall be opened, and its keepers shall say to them, "Came
not apostles from among yourselves to you, reciting to you the signs of your
Lord, and warning you of the meeting with Him on this your day?"13 They shall
say, "Yes." But just is the sentence of punishment on the unbelievers.

It shall be said to them, "Enter ye the gates of Hell, therein to dwell for
ever;" and wretched the abode of the arrogant!

But those who feared their Lord shall be driven on by troops to Paradise,
until when they reach it, its gates shall be opened, and its keepers shall
say to them, "All hail! virtuous have ye been: enter then in, to abide herein
for ever."

And they shall say, "Praise be to God, who hath made good to us His promise,
and hath given to us the earth as our heritage, that we may dwell in Paradise
wherever we please!" And goodly is the reward of those who travailed
virtuously.

And thou shalt see the Angels circling around the Throne with praises of
their Lord: and judgment shall be pronounced between them with equity: and it
shall be said, "Glory be to God the Lord of the Worlds."


_______________________

1 Lit. the sending down, or revelation, of the Book is, etc.

2 Lit. in truth, i.e. for a serious and earnest purpose, and not as mere
pastime.

3 That is, camels, oxen, sheep and goats.

4 The wording of this verse would seem to indicate a period when Muhammad was
meditating flight from Mecca. Comp. [lxxxi.] xxix. 56.

5 See on the word Mathani, Sura xv. 87, p. 116. Or, by rhyming couplets.

6 The word associates contains an implied allusion to the deities associated
with God, and who distract the idolaters in their worship.

7 In the fem. gender in the Ar. This passage was revealed shortly after the
circumstances mentioned, liii. 20, n. p. 70.

8 See Sura [lxxxix.] vi. 60.

9 That is, none may intercede with Him but those whom He permits to do so.

10 Lit. It was only given to me on account of knowledge. Mar. Deus sciebat me
esse dignum eo. Thus Sale.

11 By becoming apostates from Islam. Comp. Sura [lxxiii.] xvi. 108. This and
the two following verses are said to have originated at Medina. His 230, Wah.
Omar ben Muhammad. Beidh. Itq. 19.

12 Lit. they have not esteemed God according to the truth of His estimation.

13 Adventum diei hujus. Mar.


SURA XXIX.-THE SPIDER [LXXXI.]

MECCA-69 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM.1 Think men that when they say, "We believe," they shall be
let alone and not be put to proof?

We put to proof those who lived before them; for God will surely take
knowledge of those who are sincere, and will surely take knowledge of the
liars.

Think they who work evil that they shall escape Us? Ill do they judge.

To him who hopeth to meet God, the set time of God will surely come. The
Hearer, the Knower, He!

Whoso maketh efforts for the faith, maketh them for his own good only. Verily
God is rich enough to dispense with all creatures.

And as to those who shall have believed and done the things that are right,
their evil deeds will we surely blot out from them, and according to their
best actions will we surely reward them.

Moreover we have enjoined on man to shew kindness to parents: but if they
strive with thee that thou join that with Me of which thou hast no
knowledge,2 obey them not. To me do ye return, and then will I tell you of
your doings:

And those who shall have believed and done the things that are right, we will
surely give them an entering in among the just.

But some men say, "We believe in God," yet when they meet with sufferings in
the cause of God, they regard trouble from man as chastisement from God. Yet
if a success come from thy Lord they are sure to say, "We were on your side!"
Doth not God well know what is in the breasts of his creatures?

Yes, and God well knoweth those who believe, and He well knoweth the
Hypocrites.

The unbelievers say to the faithful, "Follow ye our way, and we will surely
bear your sins." But not aught of their sins will they bear-verily they are
liars!

But their own burdens, and burdens beside their own burdens shall they surely
bear: and inquisition shall be made of them on the day of Resurrection as to
their false devices.

Of old sent we Noah to his people: a thousand years save fifty did he tarry
among them; and the flood overtook them in their wrongful doings:

But we rescued him and those who were in the vessel; and we made it a sign to
all men:

And Abraham; when he said to his people, "Worship God and fear Him. This will
be best for you, if ye have knowledge;"

Ye only worship idols beside God, and are the authors of a lie. Those whom ye
worship beside God can give you no supplies: seek, then, your supplies from
God; and serve Him and give Him thanks. To Him shall ye return.

Suppose that ye treat me as a liar! nations before you have treated God's
messenger as a liar; but open preaching is his only duty.

See they not how God bringeth forth creation? and then causeth it to return
again? This truly is easy for God.

SAY,3 Go through the earth, and see how he hath brought forth created beings.
Hereafter, with a second birth will God cause them to be born again; for God
is Almighty.

Whom He pleaseth will He chastise, and on whom He pleaseth will He have
mercy, and to Him shall ye be taken back.

And ye shall not invalidate his power either in the Earth or in the Heaven:4
and, save God, ye shall have neither patron nor helper.

As for those who believe not in the signs of God, or that they shall ever
meet him, these of my mercy shall despair, and these doth a grievous
chastisement await."

And the only answer of his people was to say, "Slay him or burn him." But
from the fire did God save him! Verily, herein are signs to those who
believe.

And Abraham said, "Of a truth ye have taken idols along with God as your bond
of union5 in this life present;

But on the day of resurrection some of you shall deny the others, and some of
you shall curse the others; and your abode shall be the fire, and ye shall
have none to help."

But Lot believed on him,6 and said, "I betake me to my Lord, for He truly is
the Mighty, the Wise."

And we bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob,7 and placed the gift of prophecy and
the Scripture among his posterity; And we gave him his reward in this world,
and in the next he shall be among the just.

We sent also Lot: when he said to his people, "Proceed ye to a filthiness in
which no people in the world hath ever gone before you?

Proceed ye even to men? attack ye them on the highway? and proceed ye to the
crime in your assemblies?" But the only answer of his people was to say,
"Bring God's chastisement upon us, if thou art a man of truth."

He cried: My Lord! help me against this polluted people.

And when our messengers came to Abraham with the tidings of a son, they said,
"Of a truth we will destroy the in-dwellers in this city, for its in-dwellers
are evil doers."

He said, "Lot is therein." They said, "We know full well who therein is. Him
and his family will we save, except his wife; she will be of those who
linger.

And when our messengers came to Lot, he was troubled for them, and his arm
was too weak8 to protect them; and they said, "Fear not, and distress not
thyself, for thee and thy family will we save, except thy wife; she will be
of those who linger.9

We will surely bring down upon the dwellers in this city vengeance from
Heaven for the excesses they have committed."

And in what we have left of it is a clear sign to men of understanding.

And to Madian we sent their brother Shoaib. And he said, "Oh! my people!
worship God, and expect the latter day, and enact not in the land deeds of
harmful excess."

But they treated him as an impostor: so an earthquake assailed them; and at
morn they were found prostrate and dead in their dwellings.

And we destroyed Ad and Themoud. Already is this made plain to you in the
ruins of their dwellings. For Satan had made their own works fair seeming to
them, and drew them from the right path, keen-sighted though they were.

And Corah and Pharaoh and Haman. With proofs of his mission did Moses come to
them, and they behaved proudly on the earth; but us they could not
outstrip;10

For, every one of them did we seize in his sin. Against some of them did
wesend a stone-charged wind: Some of them did the terrible cry of Gabriel
surprise: for some of them we cleaved the earth; and some of them we drowned.
And it was not God who would deal wrongly by them, but they wronged
themselves.

The likeness for those who take to themselves guardians instead of God is the
likeness of the SPIDER who buildeth her a house: But verily, frailest of all
houses surely is the house of the spider. Did they but know this!

God truly knoweth all that they call on beside Him; and He is the Mighty, the
Wise.

These similitudes do we set forth to men: and none understand them except the
wise.

God hath created the Heavens and the Earth for a serious end.11 Verily in
this is a sign to those who believe.

Recite the portions of the Book which have been revealed to thee and
discharge the duty of prayer: for prayer restraineth from the filthy and the
blame-worthy. And the gravest duty is the remembrance of God; and God knoweth
what ye do.

Dispute not, unless in kindly sort, with the people of the Book;12 save with
such of them as have dealt wrongfully with you: And say ye, "We believe in
what hath been sent down to us and hath been sent down to you. Our God and
your God is one, and to him are we self-surrendered" (Muslims).

Thus have we sent down the Book of the Koran to thee: and they to whom we
have given the Book of the law believe in it: and of these Arabians there are
those who believe in it: and none, save the Infidels, reject our signs.

Thou didst not recite any book (of revelation) before it: with that right
hand of thine thou didst not transcribe one: else might they who treat it as
a vain thing have justly doubted:

But it is a clear sign in the hearts of those whom "the knowledge" hath
reached. None except the wicked reject our signs.

And they say, "Unless a sign be sent down to him from his Lord. . . ." SAY:
Signs are in the power of God alone. I am only a plain spoken warner.

Is it not enough for them that we have sent down to thee the Book to be
recited to them? In this verily is a mercy and a warning to those who
believe.

SAY: God is witness enough between me and you.

He knoweth all that is in the Heavens and the Earth, and they who believe in
vain things13 and disbelieve in God-these shall be the lost ones.

They will challenge thee to hasten the punishment: but had there not been a
season fixed for it, that punishment had already come upon them. But it shall
overtake them suddenly when they look not for it.

They will challenge thee to hasten the punishment: but verily Hell shall be
round about the infidels.

One day the punishment shall wrap them round, both from above them and from
beneath their feet; and God will say, "Taste ye your own doings."

O my servants who have believed! Vast truly is my Earth:14 me, therefore! yea
worship me.

Every soul shall taste of death. Then to us shall ye return.

But those who shall have believed and wrought righteousness will we lodge in
gardens with palaces, beneath which the rivers flow. For ever shall they
abide therein. How goodly the reward of those who labour,

Who patiently endure, and put their trust in their Lord!

How many animals are there which provide not15 their own food! God feedeth
them and you. He Heareth, Knoweth all things.

If thou ask them who hath created the Heavens and the Earth, and hath imposed
laws on the sun and on the moon, they will certainly say, "God." How then can
they devise lies?

God lavisheth supplies on such of his servants as He pleaseth or giveth to
them by measure. God knoweth all things.

If thou ask them who sendeth rain from heaven, and by it quickeneth the
earth, after it hath been dead, they will certainly answer, "God." SAY:
Praise be to God! Yet most of them do not understand.

This present life is no other than a pastime and a disport: but truly the
future mansion is life indeed! Would that they knew this!

Lo! when they embark on shipboard, they call upon God, vowing him sincere
worship, but when He bringeth them safe to land, behold they join partners
with Him.

In our revelation they believe not, yet take their fill of good things. But
in the end they shall know their folly.

Do they not see that we have established a safe precinct16 while all around
them men are being spoiled? Will they then believe in vain idols, and not own
the goodness of God?

But who acteth more wrongly than he who deviseth a lie against God, or calls
the truth when it hath come to him, a lie? Is there not an abode for the
infidels in Hell?

And whoso maketh efforts for us, in our ways will we guide them: for God is
assuredly with those who do righteous deeds.


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. p. 32. The first ten verses of this Sura were revealed at
Medina, after the battles of Bedr and Ohod. N√∂ld. p. 115.

2 Deities for whose worship thou canst shew no authority. Comp. Tr.
Jebhamoth, fol. 6. If a father saith to his son, "Defile thyself," or saith,
"Make not restitution," shall he obey him? It is said (Lev. xix. 3), Let
every man reverence his father and mother, but keep my Sabbaths all of you:
ye are all bound to honour me. Thus also Midr. Jalkut, 604. Comp. next Sura,
v. 13.

3 The word SAY-the usual address of God or Gabriel to Muhammad-must either be
considered as spoken by God to Abraham, in which case we have a curious
instance of the manner in which Muhammad identifies himself with Abraham, and
makes Abraham speak in words which he constantly elsewhere uses himself; or,
with Wahl, we must suppose that from v. 17 to v. 22 are misplaced.

4 Comp. Ps. cxxxix. 7.

5 Lit. for love among yourselves, or as an object of love, i.e. devout
worship.

6 Thus Sura [lxv.] xxi. 71. The Midr. Rabbah on Gen. Par. 18, says that
Haran, the father of Lot, was brought by Abraham's deliverance from the
furnace to the adoption of his doctrines. Muhammad may have transferred this
idea to Lot.

7 The following passages deserve to be compared, as shewing the loose way in
which Muhammad could speak of the relationship subsisting between Abraham and
the other Patriarchs. See 38 below. Sura [xci.] ii. 127; [lxxxix.] vi. 84;
[lviii.] xix. 50; [lxv.] xxi. 72; [lxxvii.] xii. 6. It is a curious
coincidence that in the Sonna 398, 400, Joseph is said to be the Grandson,
and Jacob the Son, of Abraham.

8 Lit. was straitened in regard to them.

9 See [lxxv.] xi. 83.

10 So as to fly from our vengeance.

11 Lit. in truth.

12 With the Jews. This passage is quoted by modern Muslims in justification
of their indifference with respect to the propagation of their religion. "The
number of the faithful," said one of them to Mr. Lane, "is decreed by God,
and no act of man can increase or diminish it." Mod. Egypt. i. p. 364.
N√∂ldeke supposes this verse to have been revealed at Medina, and renders,
Contend not except in the best way, i.e. not by words but by force.

13 Idols.

14 That is, you may find places of refuge where you may worship the true God
in some other parts of the earth, if driven forth from your native city. This
verse is very indicative of a late Meccan origin. Flight from Mecca must have
been imminent when Muhammad could thus write.

15 Lit. carry not. Comp. Matth. vi. 26; Luke xii. 24.

16 At Mecca.


SURA XXXI.-LOKMAN1 [LXXXII.]

MECCA.-34 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM.2 These are the verses (signs) of the wise Book,

A guidance and a mercy to the righteous,

Who observe prayer, and pay the impost,3 and believe firmly in the life to
come:-

These rest on guidance from their Lord, and with these it shall be well.

But a man there is4 who buyeth an idle tale, that in his lack of knowledge he
may mislead others from the way of God, and turn it to scorn. For such is
prepared a shameful punishment!

And when our signs are rehearsed to him, he turneth away disdainfully, as
though he heard them not,-as though his ears were heavy with deafness.
Announce to him therefore tidings of an afflictive punishment!

But they who shall have believed and wrought good works, shall enjoy the
gardens of delight:

For ever shall they dwell therein: it is God's true promise! and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

Without pillars that can be seen hath He created the heavens, and on the
earth hath thrown mountains lest it should move with you;5 and He hath
scattered over it animals of every sort: and from the Heaven we send down
rain and cause every kind of noble plant to grow up therein.

This is the creation of God: Shew me now what others than He have created.
Ah! the ungodly are in a manifest delusion.

Of old we bestowed wisdom upon LOKMAN, and taught him thus-"Be thankful to
God: for whoever is thankful, is thankful to his own behoof; and if any shall
be thankless . . .  God truly is self-sufficient, worthy of all praise!"

And bear in mind when Lokman said to his son by way of warning, "O my son!
join not other gods with God, for the joining gods with God is the great
impiety."

(We have commanded6 man concerning his parents. His mother carrieth him with
weakness upon weakness; nor until after two years is he weaned.7 Be grateful
to me, and to thy parents. Unto me shall all come.

But if they importune thee to join that with Me of which thou hast no
knowledge, obey them not: comport thyself towards them in this world as is
meet and right; but follow the way of him who turneth unto me. Unto me shall
ye return at last, and then will I tell you of your doings;)

"O my son! verily God will bring everything to light, though it were but the
weight of a grain of mustard-seed, and hidden in a rock or in the heavens or
in the earth; for, God is subtile, informed of all.

O my son! observe prayer, and enjoin the right and forbid the wrong, and be
patient under whatever shall betide thee: for this is a bounden duty.

And distort not thy face at men; nor walk thou loftily on the earth; for God
loveth no arrogant vain-glorious one.

But let thy pace be middling; and lower thy voice: for the least pleasing of
voices is surely the voice of asses."

See ye not how that God hath put under you all that is in the heavens and all
that is on the earth, and hath been bounteous to you of his favours, both for
soul and body.8 But some are there who dispute of God without knowledge, and
have no guidance and no illuminating Book:

And when it is said to them, Follow ye what God hath sent down, they say,
"Nay; that religion in which we found our fathers will we follow." What!
though Satan bid them to the torment of the flame?

But whoso setteth his face toward God with self-surrender, and is a doer of
that which is good, hath laid hold on a sure handle; for unto God is the
issue of all things.

But let not the unbelief of the unbelieving grieve thee: unto us shall they
return: then will we tell them of their doings; for God knoweth the very
secrets of the breast.

Yet a little while will we provide for them: afterwards will we force them to
a stern punishment.

If thou ask them who hath created the heavens and the earth, they will
certainly reply, "God." SAY: God be praised! But most of them have no
knowledge.

God's, whatever is in the Heavens and the Earth! for God, He is the Rich,9
the Praiseworthy.

If all the trees that are upon the earth were to become pens, and if God
should after that swell the sea into seven seas of ink, His words would not
be exhausted: for God is Mighty, Wise.10

Your creation and your quickening hereafter, are but as those of a single
individual. Verily, God Heareth, Seeth!

Seest thou not that God causeth the night to come in upon the day, and the
day to come in upon the night? and that he hath subjected the sun and the
moon to laws by which each speedeth along to an appointed goal? and that God
therefore is acquainted with that which ye do?

This, for that God is the truth; and that whatever ye call upon beside Him is
a vain thing; and that God-He is the High, the Great.

Seest thou not how the ships speed on in the sea, through the favour of God,
that he may shew you of his signs? for herein are signs to all patient,
grateful ones.

When the waves cover them like dark shadows they call upon God as with
sincere religion; but when He safely landeth them, some of them there are who
halt between two opinions.11 Yet none reject our signs but all deceitful,
ungrateful ones.

O men! fear ye your Lord, and dread the day whereon father shall not atone
for son, neither shall a son in the least atone for his father.

Aye! the promise of God is a truth. Let not this present life then deceive
you; neither let the deceiver deceive you concerning God.

Aye! God!-with Him is the knowledge of the Hour: and He sendeth down the
rain-and He knoweth what is in the wombs-but no soul knoweth what it shall
have gotten on the morrow: neither knoweth any soul in what land it shall
die. But God is knowing, informed of all.


_______________________

1 Nothing certain is known concerning the history of this fabulist and
philosopher. The opinion most generally received is that Lokman is the same
person whom the Greeks, not knowing his real name, have called ƒÜsop, i.e.,
ƒÜthiops. This Sura shews the high degree of respect entertained for Lokman in
Arabia at the time of Muhammad, who doubtless aimed to promote the interests
of his new religion by connecting the Koran with so celebrated a name.

2 See Sura lxviii. 1, p. 32.

3 Beidh. and Itq. suppose this verse to have been revealed at Medina, on
account of the precept to pay the impost, required by Muhammad of his
followers as a religious duty, and different from the alms. The former is
usually coupled with the duty of observing prayer. Mar. renders, sacrum
censum in marg.

4 Nodhar Ibn El Hareth, who had purchased in Persia the romance of Roustem
and Isfendiar, two of the most famous heroes of that land, which he recited
to the Koreisch as superior to the Koran.

5 Comp. Ps. civ. 5.

6 This verse and the verse following would seem more naturally to follow
verse 18, where Wahl has placed them. See preceding Sura, v. 7.

7 Comp. Talm. Kethuboth, 60, 1, "A woman is to suckle her child two years."
Comp. Jos. Ant. ii. 9, 6.

8 Or, the seen and unseen, lit., outwardly and inwardly.

9 Or as rendered in verse 11, "the self-sufficient."

10 Wah. Omar ben Muhammad, Zam. and Beidh. suppose this and the three
following verses to have been revealed at Medina, in answer to the Jews, who
had affirmed that all knowledge was contained in their own Law. But the
accuracy of this supposition is very doubtful, if considered with regard to
the preceding and following context.

11 Between idolatry and Islam.


SURA XLII.-COUNSEL [LXXXIII.]

MECCA.-53 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HA. MIM. AIN. SIN. KAF.1 Thus unto thee as unto those who preceded thee doth
God, the Mighty, the Wise, reveal!

All that is in the Heavens and all that is in the Earth is His: and He is the
High, the Great!

Ready are the Heavens to cleave asunder from above for very awe: and the
angels celebrate the praise of their Lord, and ask forgiveness for the
dwellers on earth: Is not God the Indulgent, the Merciful?

But whose take aught beside Him as lords-God watcheth them! but thou hast
them not in thy charge.

It is thus moreover that we have revealed to thee an Arabic Koran, that thou
mayest warn the mother city2 and all around it, and that thou mayest warn
them of that day of the Gathering, of which there is no doubt-when part shall
be in Paradise and part in the flame.

Had God so pleased, He had made them one people and of one creed: but He
bringeth whom He will within His mercy; and as for the doers of evil, no
patron, no helper shall there be for them.

Will they take other patrons than Him? But God is man's only Lord: He
quickeneth the dead; and He is mighty over all things.

And whatever the subject of your disputes, with God doth its decision rest.
This is God, my Lord: in Him do I put my trust, and to Him do I turn in
penitence;

Creator of the Heavens and of the Earth! he hath given you wives from among
your own selves, and cattle male and female-by this means to multiply you:
Nought is there like Him! the Hearer, the Beholder He!

His, the keys of the Heavens and of the Earth! He giveth with open hand, or
sparingly, to whom He will: He knoweth all things.

To you hath He prescribed the faith which He commanded unto Noah, and which
we have revealed to thee, and which we commanded unto Abraham and Moses and
Jesus, saying, "Observe this faith, and be not divided into sects therein."
Intolerable to those who worship idols jointly with God

Is that faith to which thou dost call them. Whom He pleaseth will God choose
for it, and whosoever shall turn to Him in penitence will He guide to it.

Nor were they divided into sects through mutual jealousy, till after that
"the knowledge" had come to them: and had not a decree from thy Lord gone
forth respiting them to a fixed time, verily, there had at once been a
decision between them.3 And they who have inherited "the Book" after them,
are in perplexity of doubt concerning it.

For this cause summon thou them to the faith, and go straight on as thou hast
been bidden, and follow not their desires: and SAY: In whatsoever Books God
hath sent down do I believe: I am commanded to decide justly between you: God
is your Lord and our Lord: we have our works and you have your works: between
us and you let there be no strife: God will make us all one: and to Him shall
we return.

And as to those who dispute about God, after pledges of obedience given to
Him,4 their disputings shall be condemned by their Lord, and wrath shall be
on them, and theirs shall be a sore torment.

It is God who hath sent down the Book with truth, and the Balance:5 but who
shall inform thee whether haply "the Hour" be nigh?

They who believe not in it, challenge its speedy coming:6 but they who
believe are afraid because of it, and know it to be a truth. Are not they who
dispute of the Hour, in a vast error?

Benign is God towards his servants: for whom He will doth He provide: and He
is the Strong, the Mighty.

Whoso will choose the harvest field of the life to come, to him will we give
increase in this his harvest field: and whoso chooseth the harvest field of
this life, thereof will we give him: but no portion shall there be for him in
the life to come.7

Is it that they have gods who have sanctioned for them aught in the matter of
religion which God hath not allowed? But had it not been for a decree of
respite till the day of severance, judgment had ere now taken place among
them; and assuredly the impious shall undergo a painful torment.

On that day thou shalt see the impious alarmed at their own works, and the
consequence thereof shall fall upon them: but they who believe and do the
things that are right, shall dwell in the meadows of paradise: whatever they
shall desire awaiteth them with their Lord. This, the greatest boon.

This is what God announceth to his servants who believe and do the things
that are right. SAY: For this ask I no wage of you, save the love of my kin.
And whoever shall have won the merit of a good deed, we will increase good to
him therewith; for God is forgiving, grateful.

Will they say he hath forged a lie of God? If God pleased,

He could then seal up thy very heart.8 But God will bring untruth to nought,
and will make good the truth by his word: for He knoweth the very secrets of
the breast.

He it is who accepteth repentance from his servants, and forgiveth their sins
and knoweth your actions:

And to those who believe and do the things that are right will he hearken,
and augment his bounties to them:9 but the unbelievers doth a terrible
punishment await.

Should God bestow abundance upon his servants, they might act wantonly on the
earth: but He sendeth down what He will by measure; for he knoweth, beholdeth
his servants.

He it is who after that men have despaired of it, sendeth down the rain, and
spreadeth abroad his mercy: He is the Protector, the Praiseworthy.

Among his signs is the creation of the Heavens and of the Earth, and the
creatures which he hath scattered over both: and, for their gathering
together when he will, He is allpowerful!

Nor happeneth to you any mishap, but it is for your own handy-work: and yet
he forgiveth many things.

Ye cannot weaken him on the earth: neither, beside God, patron or helper
shall ye have.

Among his signs also are the sea-traversing ships like mountains: if such be
his will, He lulleth the wind, and they lie motionless on the back of the
waves:-truly herein are signs to all the constant, the grateful;-

Or if, for their ill deserts, He cause them to founder, still He forgiveth
much:

But they who gainsay our signs shall know that there will be no escape for
them.

All that you receive is but for enjoyment in this life present: but better
and more enduring is a portion with God, for those who believe and put their
trust in their Lord;

And who avoid the heinous things of crime, and filthiness, and when they are
angered, forgive;

And who hearken to their Lord, and observe prayer, and whose affairs are
guided by mutual COUNSEL, and who give alms of that with which we have
enriched them;

And who, when a wrong is done them, redress themselves:

-Yet let the recompense of evil be only a like evil but he who forgiveth and
is reconciled, shall be rewarded by God himself; for He loveth not those who
act unjustly.

And there shall be no way open against those who, after being wronged, avenge
themselves;

But there shall be a way open against those who unjustly wrong others, and
act insolently on the earth in disregard of justice. These! a grievous
punishment doth await them.

And whoso beareth wrongs with patience and forgiveth;-this verily is a
bounden duty;

But he whom God shall cause to err, shall thenceforth have no protector. And
thou shalt behold the perpetrators of injustice,

Exclaiming, when they see the torment, "Is there no way to return?"

And thou shalt see them when set before it, downcast for the shame: they
shall look at it with stealthy glances: and the believers shall say, "Truly
are the losers they who have lost themselves and their families on the day of
Resurrection! Shall not the perpetrators of injustice be in lasting torment?"

And no other protectors shall there be to succour them than God; and no
pathway for him whom God shall cause to err.

Hearken then to your Lord ere the day come, which none can put back when God
doth ordain its coming. No place of refuge for you on that day! no denying
your own works!

But if they turn aside from thee, yet we have not sent thee to be their
guardian. 'Tis thine but to preach. When we cause man to taste our gifts of
mercy, he rejoiceth in it; but if for their by-gone handy-work evil betide
them, then lo! is man ungrateful.

God's, the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth! He createth what He will!
and he giveth daughters to whom He will, and sons to whom He will:

Or He giveth them children of both sexes, and He maketh whom He will to be
childless; for He is Wise, Powerful!

It is not for man that God should speak with him but by vision, or from
behind a veil:

Or, He sendeth a messenger to reveal, by his permission, what He will: for He
is Exalted, Wise!

Thus have we sent the Spirit (Gabriel10) to thee with a revelation, by our
command. Thou knewest not, ere this, what "the Book" was, or what the faith.
But we have ordained it for a light: by it will we guide whom we please of
our servants. And thou shalt surely guide into the right way,

The way of God, whose is all that the Heaven and the Earth contain. Shall not
all things return to God?


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. 1, p. 32.

2 Mecca.

3 Jews and Christians.

4 Or, nachdem ihm (Mohamed) die Lehre geworden. Ullm. Postquam responsum fuit
illi (id est, Mahumeto de Religione manifestanda). Mar.

5 The law contained in the Koran.

6 Isai. v. 19.

7 Comp. Gal. vi. 7, 8.

8 That is, deprive thee of the Prophetic mission; or, fortify thee with
patience against the calumny of forging lies of God. Thus Mar. If this latter
interpretation be adopted, the remainder of the verse must be rendered: And
God will abolish the lie and, etc.

9 Lit. he will increase them. Comp. Ps. cxv. 14.

10 Thus Beidhawi.


SURA X.-JONAH, PEACE BE ON HIM! [LXXXIV.]

MECCA.-109 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. RA.1 These are the signs of the wise Book!

A matter of wonderment is it to the men of Mecca, that to a person among
themselves We revealed, "Bear warnings to the people: and, to those who
believe, bear the good tidings that they shall have with their Lord the
precedence merited by their sincerity." The unbelievers say, "Verily this is
a manifest sorcerer."

Verily your Lord is God who hath made the Heavens and the Earth in six days-
then mounted his throne to rule all things: None can intercede with him till
after his permission: This is God your Lord: therefore serve him: Will ye not
reflect?

Unto Him shall ye return, all together: the promise of God is sure: He
produceth a creature, then causeth it to return again-that he may reward
those who believe and do the things that are right, with equity: but as for
the infidels!-for them the draught that boileth and an afflictive torment-
because they have not believed.

It is He who hath appointed the sun for brightness, and the moon for a light,
and hath ordained her stations that ye may learn the number of years and the
reckoning of time. God hath not created all this but for the truth.2 He
maketh his signs clear to those who understand.

Verily, in the alternations of night and of day, and in all that God hath
created in the Heavens and in the Earth are signs to those who fear Him.

Verily, they who hope not to meet Us, and find their satisfaction in this
world's life, and rest on it, and who of our signs are heedless;-

These! their abode the fire, in recompense of their deeds!

But they who believe and do the things that are right, shall their Lord
direct aright because of their faith. Rivers shall flow at their feet in
gardens of delight:

Their cry therein, "Glory be to thee, O God!" and their salutation therein,
"Peace!"

And the close of their cry, "Praise be to God, Lord, of all creatures!"

Should God hasten evil on men as they fain would hasten their good, then were
their end decreed! So leave we those who hope not to meet Us, bewildered in
their error.

When trouble toucheth a man, he crieth to us, on his side, or sitting, or
standing; and when we withdraw his trouble from him, he passeth on as though
he had not called on us against the trouble which touched him! Thus are the
deeds of transgressors pre-arranged for them.

And of old destroyed we generations before you, when they had acted wickedly,
and their Apostles had come to them with clear tokens of their mission, and
they would not believe:-thus reward we the wicked.

Then we caused you to succeed them on the earth, that we might see how ye
would act.

But when our clear signs are recited to them, they who look not forward to
meet Us, say, "Bring a different Koran from this, or make some change in it."
SAY: It is not for me to change it as mine own soul prompteth. I follow only
what is revealed to me: verily, I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the
punishment of a great day.

SAY: Had God so pleased, I had not recited it to you, neither had I taught it
to you. Already have I dwelt among you for years, ere it was revealed to me.
Understand ye not?

And who is more unjust than he who coineth a lie against God, or treateth his
signs as lies? Surely the wicked shall not prosper!

And they worship beside God, what cannot hurt or help them; and say, "These
are our advocates with God!" SAY: Will ye inform God of aught in the Heavens
and in the Earth which he knoweth not? Praise be to Him! High be He exalted
above the deities they join with Him!

Men were of one religion only:3 then they fell to variance: and had not a
decree (of respite) previously gone forth from thy Lord, their differences
had surely been decided between them!

They say: "Unless a sign be sent down to him from his Lord. . . ." But SAY:
The hidden is only with God: wait therefore: I truly will be with you among
those who wait.

And when after a trouble which you befallen them,4 we caused this people to
taste of mercy, lo! a plot on their part against our signs! SAY: Swifter to
plot is God! Verily, our messengers note down your plottings.

He it is who enableth you to travel by land and sea, so that ye go on board
of ships-which sail on with them, with favouring breeze in which they
rejoice. But if a tempestuous gale overtake them, and the billow come on them
from every side, and they think that they are encompassed therewith, they
call on God, professing sincere religion:-"Wouldst thou but rescue us from
this, then will we indeed be of the thankful."

But when we have rescued them, lo! they commit unrighteous excesses on the
earth! O men! assuredly your self-injuring excess is only an enjoyment of
this life present: soon ye return to us: and we will let you know what ye
have done!

Verily, this present life is like the water which we send down from Heaven,
and the produce of the earth, of which men and cattle eat, is mingled with
it, till the earth hath received its golden raiment, and is decked out: and
they who dwell on it deem that they have power over it! but, Our behest
cometh to it by night or by day, and we make it as if it had been mown, as if
it had not teemed only yesterday! Thus make we our signs clear to those who
consider.

And God calleth to the abode of peace;5 and He guideth whom He will into the
right way.

Goodness6 itself and an increase of it for those who do good! neither
blackness nor shame shall cover their faces! These shall be the inmates of
Paradise, therein shall they abide for ever.

And as for those who have wrought out evil, their recompense shall be evil of
like degree, and shame shall cover them-no protector shall they have against
God: as though their faces were darkened with deep murk of night! These shall
be inmates of the fire: therein they shall abide for ever.

And on that day will we gather them all together: then will we say to those
who added gods to God, "To your place, ye and those added gods of yours!"
Then we will separate between them: and those their gods shall say, "Ye
served us not:7

And God is a sufficient witness between us and you: we cared not aught for
your worship."

There shall every soul make proof of what itself shall have sent on before,
and they shall be brought back to God, their true lord, and the deities of
their own devising shall vanish from them.

SAY: Who supplieth you from the Heaven and the Earth? Who hath power over
hearing and sight? And who bringeth forth the living from the dead, and
bringeth forth the dead from the living? And who ruleth all things? They will
surely say, "God:" then SAY: "What! will ye not therefore fear him?

This God then is your true Lord: and when the truth is gone, what remaineth
but error? How then are ye so perverted?

Thus is the word of thy Lord made good on the wicked, that they shall not
believe.

SAY: Is there any of the gods whom ye add to God who produceth a creature,
then causeth it to return to him? SAY: God produceth a creature, then causeth
it to return to Him: How therefore are ye turned aside?

SAY: Is there any of the gods ye add to God who guideth into the truth? SAY:
God guideth into the truth. Is He then who guideth into the truth the more
worthy to be followed, or he who guideth not unless he be himself guided?
What then hath befallen you that ye so judge?

And most of them follow only a conceit:-But a conceit attaineth to nought of
truth! Verily God knoweth what they say.

Moreover this Koran could not have been devised by any but God: but it
confirmeth what was revealed before it, and is a clearing up of the
Scriptures-there is no doubt thereof-from the Lord of all creatures.

Do they say, "He hath devised it himself?" SAY: Then bring a Sura like it;
and call on whom ye can beside God, if ye speak truth.

But that which they embrace not in their knowledge have they charged with
falsehood, though the explanation of it had not yet been given them. So those
who were before them brought charges of imposture: But see what was the end
of the unjust!

And some of them believe in it, and some of them believe not in it. But thy
Lord well knoweth the transgressors.

And if they charge thee with imposture, then SAY: My work for me, and your
work for you! Ye are clear of that which I do, and I am clear of that which
ye do.

And some of them lend a ready ear to thee: But wilt thou make the deaf to
hear even though they understand not?

And some of them look at thee: But wilt thou guide the blind even though they
see not?

Verily, God will not wrong men in aught, but men will wrong themselves.

Moreover, on that day, He will gather them all together: They shall seem as
though they had waited but an hour of the day! They shall recognise one
another! Now perish they who denied the meeting with God, and were not guided
aright!

Whether we cause thee to see some of our menaces against them fulfilled, or
whether we first take thee to Ourself,8 to us do they return. Then shall God
bear witness of what they do.

And every people hath had its apostle.9 And when their apostle came, a
rightful decision took place between them, and they were not wronged.

Yet they say, "When will this menace be made good? Tell us if ye speak
truly."

SAY: I have no power over my own weal or woe, but as God pleaseth. Every
people hath its time: when their time is come, they shall neither retard nor
advance it an hour.

SAY: How think ye? if God's punishment came on you by night or by day, what
portion of it would the wicked desire to hasten on?

When it falleth on you, will ye believe it then? Yes! ye will believe it
then. Yet did ye challenge its speedy coming.

Then shall it be said to the transgressors, "Taste ye the punishment of
eternity! Shall ye be rewarded but as ye have wrought?"

They will desire thee to inform them whether this be true? SAY: Yes! by my
Lord it is the truth: and it is not ye who can weaken Him.

And every soul that hath sinned, if it possessed all that is on earth, would
assuredly ransom itself therewith; and they will proclaim their repentance
when they have seen the punishment: and there shall be a rightful decision
between them, and they shall not be unjustly dealt with.

Is not whatever is in the Heavens and the Earth God's? Is not then the
promise of God true? Yet most of them know it not.

He maketh alive and He causeth to die, and to Him shall ye return.

O men! now hath a warning come to you from your Lord, and a medicine for what
is in your breasts, and a guidance and a mercy to believers.

SAY: Through the grace of God and his mercy! and in this therefore let them
rejoice: better is this than all ye amass.

SAY: What think ye? of what God hath sent down to you for food, have ye made
unlawful and lawful? SAY: Hath God permitted you? or invent ye on the part of
God?

But what on the day of Resurrection will be the thought of those who invent a
lie on the part of God? Truly God is full of bounties to man; but most of
them give not thanks.

Thou shalt not be employed in affairs, nor shalt thou read a text out of the
Koran, nor shall ye work any work, but we will be witnesses over you when ye
are engaged therein: and not the weight of an atom on Earth or in Heaven
escapeth thy Lord; nor is there aught that is less than this or greater, but
it is in the perspicuous Book.

Are not the friends of God, those on whom no fear shall come, nor shall they
be put to grief?

They who believe and fear God-

For them are good tidings in this life, and in the next! There is no change
in the words of God! This, the great felicity!

And let not their discourse grieve thee: for all might is God's: the Hearer,
the Knower, He!

Is not whoever is in the Heavens and the Earth subject to God? What then do
they follow who, beside God, call upon deities they have joined with Him?
They follow but a conceit, and they are but liars!

It is He who hath ordained for you the night wherein to rest, and the
lightsome day. Verily in this are signs for those who hearken.

They say, "God hath begotten children." No! by his glory! He is the self-
sufficient. All that is in the Heavens and all that is in the Earth is His!
Have ye warranty for that assertion? What! speak ye of God that which ye know
not?

SAY: Verily, they who devise this lie concerning God shall fare ill.

A portion have they in this world! Then to us they return! Then make we them
to taste the vehement torment, for that they were unbelievers.

Recite to them the history of Noah,10 when he said to his people,-If, O my
people! my abode with you, and my reminding you of the signs of God, be
grievous to you, yet in God is my trust: Muster, therefore, your designs and
your false gods, and let not your design be carried on by you in the dark:
then come to some decision about me, and delay not.

And if ye turn your backs on me, yet ask I no reward from you: my reward is
with God alone, and I am commanded to be of the Muslims.

But they treated him as a liar: therefore we rescued him and those who were
with him in the ark, and we made them to survive the others; and we drowned
those who charged our signs with falsehood. See, then, what was the end of
these warned ones!

Then after him, we sent Apostles to their peoples, and they came to them with
credentials; but they would not believe in what they had denied aforetime:
Thus seal we up the hearts of the transgressors!

Then sent we, after them, Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his nobles with our
signs; but they acted proudly and were a wicked people:

And when the truth came to them from us, they said, "Verily, this is clear
sorcery."

Moses said: "What! say ye of the truth after it hath come to you, 'Is this
sorcery?' But sorcerers shall not prosper."

They said: "Art thou come to us to pervert us from the faith in which we
found our fathers, and that you twain shall bear rule in this land? But we
believe you not."

And Pharaoh said: "Fetch me every skilled magician." And when the magicians
arrived, Moses said to them, "Cast down what ye have to cast."

And when they had cast them down, Moses said, "Verily, God will render vain
the sorceries which ye have brought to pass: God prospereth not the work of
the evildoers.

And by his words will God verify the Truth, though the impious be averse to
it.

And none believed on Moses but a race among his own people, through fear of
Pharaoh and his nobles, lest he should afflict them: For of a truth mighty
was Pharaoh in the land, and one who committed excesses.

And Moses said: "O my people! if ye believe in God, then put your trust in
Him-if ye be Muslims."

And they said: "In God put we our trust. O our Lord! abandon us not to trial
from that unjust people,

And deliver us by thy mercy from the unbelieving people."

Then thus revealed we to Moses and to his brother: "Provide houses for your
people in Egypt, and in your houses make a Kebla, and observe prayer and
proclaim good tidings to the believers."

And Moses said: "O our Lord! thou hast indeed given to Pharaoh and his nobles
splendour and riches in this present life: O our Lord! that they may err from
thy way! O our Lord! confound their riches, and harden their hearts that they
may not believe till they see the dolorous torment."

He said: "The prayer of you both is heard: pursue ye both therefore the
straight path, and follow not the path of those who have no knowledge."

And we led the children of Israel through the sea; and Pharaoh and his hosts
followed them in eager and hostile sort until, when the drowning overtook
him, he said, "I believe that there is no God but he on whom the children of
Israel believe, and I am one of the Muslims."

"Yes, now," said God: "but thou hast been rebellious hitherto, and wast one
of the wicked doers.

But this day will we rescue thee with thy body that thou mayest be a sign to
those who shall be after thee:11 but truly, most men are of our signs
regardless!"

Moreover we prepared a settled abode for the children of Israel, and provided
them with good things: nor did they fall into variance till the knowledge
(the Law) came to them: Truly thy Lord will decide between them on the day of
Resurrection concerning that in which they differed.

And if thou art in doubt as to what we have sent down to thee, inquire at
those who have read the Scriptures before thee.12 Now hath the truth come
unto thee from thy Lord: be not therefore of those who doubt.

Neither be of those who charge the signs of God with falsehood, lest thou be
of those who perish.

Verily they against whom the decree of thy Lord is pronounced, shall not
believe,

Even though every kind of sign come unto them, till they behold the dolorous
torment!

Were it otherwise, any city, had it believed, might have found its safety in
its faith. But it was so, only with the people of JONAS. When they believed,
we delivered them from the penalty of shame in this world, and provided for
them for a time.

But if thy Lord had pleased, verily all who are in the earth would have
believed together. What! wilt thou compel men to become believers?

No soul can believe but by the permission of God: and he shall lay his wrath
on those who will not understand.

SAY: Consider ye whatever is in the Heavens and on the Earth: but neither
signs, nor warners, avail those who will not believe!

What then can they expect but the like of such days of wrath as befel those
who flourish before them? SAY: WAIT; I too will wait with you:

Then will we deliver our apostles and those who believe. Thus is it binding
on us to deliver the faithful.

SAY: O men! if ye are in doubt as to my religion, verily I worship not what
ye worship beside God; but I worship God who will cause you to die: and I am
commanded to be a believer.

And set thy face toward true religion, sound in faith, and be not of those
who join other gods with God:

Neither invoke beside God that which can neither help nor hurt thee: for if
thou do, thou wilt certainly then be one of those who act unjustly.

And if God lay the touch of trouble on thee, none can deliver thee from it
but He: and if He will thee any good, none can keep back his boons. He will
confer them on such of his servants as he chooseth: and He is the Gracious,
the Merciful!

SAY: O men! now hath the truth come unto you from your Lord. He therefore who
will be guided, will be guided only for his own behoof: but he who shall err
will err only against it; and I am not your guardian!

And follow what is revealed to thee: and persevere steadfastly till God shall
judge, for He is the best of Judges.


_______________________

1 See Sura 1xviii. n. 3, p. 32.

2 That is, for a serious end, to manifest the Divine Unity.

3 Gen. xi. 1.

4 This refers to the seven years of scarcity with which Mecca had been
visited.

5 Paradise.

6 Verses 27, 28 are to be noted, as defining the proportion to be observed in
rewards and punishments, the severity of the latter being only in proportion
to the crime, the excellence of the former being above and beyond its strict
merits.

7 But rather your own lusts. The Muhammadans believe that idols will be
gifted with speech at the day of judgment.

8 The ordinary Arabic word for to die seems to be avoided in speaking of
Jesus and Muhammad.

9 This is the doctrine of the Rabbins. Comp. Midrasch Rabba, and Midr. Jalkut
on Numb. xxii. 2.

10 The preaching of Noah is mentioned by the Rabbins. Sanhedrin, 108. Comp.
Midr. Rabbah on Gen. Par. 30 and 33, on Eccl. ix. 14, and in the probably
sub. Apostolic 2 Pet. ii. 5.

11 This is in accordance with Talmudic legend. "Recognise the power of
repentance, in the case of Pharaoh, King of Egypt, who rebelled excessively
against the most High; Who is God that I should hearken to his voice? (Ex. v.
2). But with the same tongue that sinned he did penance: Who is like thee, O
Lord, among the Gods? (xv. 11). The Holy One, Blessed be He, delivered him
from the dead, . . . so that he should not die (ix. 15, 16).-For now have I
stretched forth my hand, and verily thee have I raised up from among the
dead, to proclaim my might." Ex. ix. 15, 16. A strange comment! Pirke R.
Eliezer, ¬ß 43. Comp. Midr. on Ps. cvi. Midr. Jalkut, ch. 238.

12 That is, whether thou art not foretold in the Law and Gospel, and whether
the Koran is not in unison with, and confirmatory of, them.


SURA XXXIV.-SABA1 [LXXXV.]

MECCA.-54 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

PRAISE be to God! to whom belongeth all that is in the Heavens and all that
is on the Earth; and to Him be praise in the next world: for he is the All-
wise, the All-informed!

He knoweth what entereth into the earth, and what proceedeth from it; and
what cometh down from heaven, and what goeth up into it: and He is the
Merciful, the Forgiving!

"Never," say the unbelievers, "will the Hour come upon us!" SAY: Yea, by my
Lord who knoweth the unseen, it will surely come upon you! not the weight of
a mote either in the Heavens or in the Earth escapeth him; nor is there aught
less than this or aught greater, which is not in the clear Book;-

To the intent that God may reward those who have believed and done the things
that are right: Pardon and a noble provision shall they receive:

But as for those who aim to invalidate our signs,-a chastisement of painful
torment awaiteth them!

And they to whom knowledge hath been given see that what hath been sent down
to thee from thy Lord is the truth, and that it guideth into the way of the
Glorious one, the Praiseworthy.

But the unbelievers say to those whom they fall in with, "Shall we shew you a
man who will foretell you that when ye shall have been utterly torn and rent
to pieces, ye shall be restored in a new form?

He deviseth a lie about God, or there is a djinn in him," but they who
believe not in the next life, shall incur the chastisement, and be lost in
the mazes of estrangement from God.

What! have they never contemplated that which is before them and behind them,
the Heaven and the Earth? If such were our pleasure, we could sink them into
that Earth, or cause a portion of that Heaven to fall upon them! herein truly
is a sign for our every returning servant.

Of old bestowed we on David a gift, our special boon:-"Ye mountains and ye
birds answer his songs of praise." And we made the iron soft for him:-"Make
coats of mail, and arrange its plates; and work ye righteousness; for I
behold your actions."

And unto Solomon did we subject the wind, which travelled in the morning a
month's journey, and a month's journey in the evening. And we made a fountain
of molten brass to flow for him. And of the Djinn were some who worked in his
presence, by the will of his Lord; and such of them as swerved from our
bidding will we cause to taste the torment of the flame.

They made for him whatever he pleased, of lofty halls, and images, and dishes
large as tanks for watering camels, and cooking pots that stood firmly.
"Work," said we, "O family of David with thanksgiving:" But few of my
servants are the thankful!

And when we decreed the death of Solomon, nothing shewed them that he was
dead but a reptile of the earth that gnawed the staff which supported his
corpse.2 And when it fell, the Djinn perceived that if they had known the
things unseen, they had not continued in this shameful affliction.3

A sign there was to SABA, in their dwelling places:-two gardens, the one on
the right hand and the other on the left:-"Eat ye of your Lord's supplies,
and give thanks to him: Goodly is the country, and gracious is the Lord!"

But they turned aside: so we sent upon them the flood of Irem;4 and we
changed them their gardens into two gardens of bitter fruit and tamarisk and
some few jujube trees.

Such was our retribution on them for their ingratitude: but do we thus
recompense any except the ungrateful?

And we placed between them and the cities which we have blessed, conspicuous
cities, and we fixed easy stages: "Travel ye through them by night and day,
secure."

But they said, "O Lord! make the distance between our journeys longer,"5-and
against themselves did they act unjustly: so we made them a tale, and
scattered them with an utter scattering. Truly herein are signs to everyone
that is patient, grateful.

And Eblis found that he had judged truly of them: and they all except a
remnant of the faithful, followed him:

Yet no power had he over them. Only we would discern him who believed in the
life to come, from him who doubted of it; for thy Lord watcheth all things.

SAY: Call ye upon those whom ye deem gods, beside God: their power in the
Heavens and in the Earth is not the weight of an atom-neither have they any
share in either; nor hath He a helper from among them.

No intercession shall avail with Him but that which He shall Himself allow.
Until when at last their hearts shall be relieved from terror, they shall
say, "What saith your Lord?" they shall say, "The Truth; and He is the High,
the Great."

SAY: Who supplieth you out of the Heavens and the Earth? SAY: God. And either
we or ye have guidance, or are in palpable error!

SAY: Not as to our faults shall ye be questioned; neither shall we be
questioned as to your actions.

SAY: Our Lord will gather us together: then will He judge between us in
justice; for He is the Judge, the Knowing!

SAY: Shew me those whom ye have united with Him as associates: Nay, rather,
He is God, the Mighty, the Wise!

And we have sent thee to mankind at large, to announce and to threaten. But
most men understand not.

And they say, "When will this threat come to pass? Tell us, if ye be men of
truth."

SAY: Ye are menaced with a day, which not for an hour shall ye retard or
hasten on.

The unbelievers say, "We will not believe in this Koran, nor in the Books
which preceded it." But couldst thou see when the wicked shall be set before
their Lord! With reproaches will they answer one another. The weak shall say
to the mighty ones, "But for you we had been believers:"

Then shall the mighty ones say to the weak, "What! was it we who turned you
aside from the guidance which had reached you? Nay, but ye acted wickedly
yourselves."

And the weak shall say to the mighty ones, "Nay, but there was a plot by
night and by day, when ye bad us believe not in God, and gave him peers." And
they shall proclaim their repentance after they have seen the punishment! And
yokes will we place on the necks of those who have not believed! Shall they
be rewarded but as they have wrought?

And never have we sent a warner to any city whose opulent men did not say,
"In sooth we disbelieve your message."

And they said, "We are the more abundant in riches and in children, nor shall
we be among the punished."

SAY: Of a truth my Lord will be liberal or sparing in his supplies to whom he
pleaseth: but the greater part of men acknowledge it not.

Neither by your riches nor by your children shall you bring yourselves into
nearness with Us; but they who believe and do the thing that is right shall
have a double reward for what they shall have done: and in the pavilions of
Paradise shall they dwell secure!

But they who shall aim to invalidate our signs, shall be consigned to
punishment.

SAY: Of a truth my Lord will be liberal in supplies to whom he pleaseth of
his servants, or will be sparing to him: and whatever ye shall give in alms
he will return; and He is the best dispenser of gifts.

One day he will gather them all together: then shall he say to the angels,
"Did these worship you?"

They shall say, "Glory be to thee! Thou art our master, not these! But they
worshipped the Djinn: it was in them that most of them believed.

On this day the one of you shall have no power over others for help or hurt.
And we will say to the evil doers, "Taste ye the torment of the fire, which
ye treated as a delusion."

For when our distinct signs are recited to them, they say, "This is merely a
man who would fain pervert you from your father's Worship." And they say,
"This (Koran) is no other than a forged falsehood." And the unbelievers say
to the truth when it is presented to them, "Tis nothing but palpable
sorcery."

Yet have we given them no books in which to study deeply, nor have we sent
any one to them before thee, charged with warnings.

They also flourished before them, treated our apostles as impostors in like
sort: but not to the tenth part of what we bestowed on them,6 have these
attained. And yet when they charged my apostles with deceit, how terrible was
my vengeance:

SAY: One thing in sooth do I advise you:-that ye stand up before God two and
two, or singly,7 and then reflect that in your fellow citizen is no djinn:8
he is no other than your warner before a severe punishment.

SAY: I ask not any wage from you: keep it for yourselves: my wage is from God
alone. And He is witness over all things!

SAY: Truly my Lord sendeth forth the Truth:-Knower of things unseen!

SAY: Truth is come, and falsehood shall vanish and return no more.

SAY: If I err, verily to my own cost only shall I err: but if I have
guidance, it will be of my Lord's revealing, for He is the Hearer, the near
at hand.

Couldst thou see how they shall tremble and find no escape, and be taken
forth from the place that is so near;9

And shall say, "We believe in Him!" But how, in their present distance, shall
they receive the faith,

When they had before denied it, and aimed their shafts at the mysteries from
afar?10

And a gulf shall be between them and that which they shall desire-

As was done unto their likes of old, who were lost in the questionings of
doubt.


_______________________

1 In Arabia Felix, three days' journey from Sanaa.

2 The Talmud mentions the worm Shameer, used by Solomon to cut the stones for
building the temple. Pirke Aboth. v. See Buxt. Lex. Talmud, p. 2456. Tr.
Gittin, fol. 68; and Midr. Jalkut on 1 Kings, vi. 7. This passage of
Scripture may have suggested the idea that Solomon built, etc., by the aid of
Spirits. 3 That is, in their difficult toils.

4 See M. Caussin de Perceval Hist. des Arabes, vol. iii., who, as well as M.
de Sacy, fix this event in the second century of our era.

5 The Saba, of verse 14 formed an important branch of the trading population
of Yemen. This whole passage, 14-18, alludes to the cessation of traffic
between them and Syria, which led to the desire to lengthen the stages and
diminish the expense of the journey. See Muir's Life of Muhammad, i. p.
cxxxix. Muhammad attributes this desire to covetousness.

6 That is, of strength and material prosperity.

7 That is, so as to form a judgment free from the influence of others.

8 It is very remarkable, that when the power of Muhammad became firmly
established, he never reverts to the insinuations against the soundness of
his mind which in the earlier Suras he so often rebuts.

9 That is, their graves. Mar. So called because there is but a step into it
from the surface of the earth. Ullm.

10 That is, when in this life.


SURA XXXV.-THE CREATOR, OR THE ANGELS [LXXXVI.]

MECCA.-45 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

PRAISE be to God, Maker of the Heavens and of the Earth! Who employeth the
ANGELS as envoys, with pairs of wings, two, three, and four: He addeth to his
creature what He will! Truly God hath power for all things.

The mercy which God layeth open for man, no one can keep back; and what He
shall keep back, none can afterwards send forth. And He is the Mighty, the
Wise.

O men! bear in mind the favour of God towards you. Is there a creator other
than God, who nourisheth you with the gifts of heaven and earth? There is no
God but He! How then are ye turned aside from Him?

If they treat thee as an impostor, then before thee have apostles been
treated as impostors. But to God shall all things return.

O men! assuredly the promise of God is true: let not then the present life
deceive you: and let not the Deceiver deceive you as to God.

Yes, Satan is your foe. For a foe then hold him. He calleth his followers to
him that they may become inmates of the flame.

The unbelievers,-for them a terrible punishment!

But believers and doers of good works, for them is mercy, and a great reward!

Shall he, the evil of whose deeds are so tricked out to him that he deemeth
them good, be treated like him who seeth things aright? Verily God misleadeth
whom He will, and guideth whom He will. Spend not thy soul in sighs for them:
God knoweth their doings.

It is God who sendeth forth the winds which raise the clouds aloft: then
drive we them on to some land dead from drought,1 and give life thereby to
the earth after its death. So shall be the resurrection.

If any one desireth greatness, all greatness is in God. The good word riseth
up to Him, and the righteous deed will He exalt. But a severe punishment
awaiteth the plotters of evil things; and the plots of such will He render
vain.

Moreover, God created you of dust-then of the germs of life-then made you two
sexes: and no female conceiveth or bringeth forth without his knowledge; and
the aged ageth not, nor is aught minished from man's age, but in accordance
with the Book. An easy thing truly is this to God.

Nor are the two seas2 alike: the one fresh, sweet, pleasant for drink, and
the other salt, bitter; yet from both ye eat fresh fish, and take forth for
you ornaments to wear, and thou seest the ships cleaving their waters that ye
may go in quest of his bounties, and that ye may be thankful.

He causeth the night to enter in upon the day, and the day to enter in upon
the night; and He hath given laws to the sun and to the moon, so that each
journeyeth to its appointed goal: This is God your Lord: All power is His:
But the gods whom ye call on beside Him have no power over the husk of a date
stone!

If ye cry to them they will not hear your cry; and if they heard they would
not answer you, and in the day of resurrection they will disown your joining
them with God: and none can instruct thee like Him who is informed of all.

O men! ye are but paupers in need of God; but God is the Rich, the
Praiseworthy!

If He please, He could sweep you away, and bring forth a new creation!

Nor will this be hard for God.

And the burdened soul shall not bear the burden of another: and if the heavy
laden soul cry out for its burden to be carried, yet shall not aught of it be
carried, even by the near of kin! Thou shalt warn those who fear their Lord
in secret, and observe prayer. And whoever shall keep himself pure, he
purifieth himself to his own behoof: for unto God shall be the final
gathering.

And the blind and the seeing are not alike; neither darkness and light; nor
the shade and the hot wind;

Nor are the living and the dead the same thing! God indeed shall make whom He
will to hearken, but thou shalt not make those who are in their graves to
hearken; for only with warning art thou charged.

Verily we have sent thee with the truth; a bearer of good tidings and a
warner; nor hath there been a people unvisited by its warner.

And if they treat thee as a liar, so did those who were before them threat
their Apostles who came to them with the proofs of their mission, and with
the Scriptures and with the enlightening Book:3

Then chastised I the unbelievers: and how great was my vengeance!

Seest thou not how that God sendeth down water from the Heaven, and that by
it we cause the up-growth of fruits of varied hues, and that on the
mountains4 are tracks of varied hues, white and red, and others are of a
raven black? And of men and reptiles and animals, various likewise are the
hues. Such only of his servants as are possessed of knowledge fear God. Lo!
God is Mighty, Gracious!

Verily they who recite the Book of God, and observe prayer, and give alms in
public and in private from what we have bestowed upon them, may hope for a
merchandise that shall not perish:

God will certainly pay them their due wages, and of his bounty increase them:
for He is Gracious, Grateful.

And that which we have revealed to thee of the Book is the very Truth,
confirmatory of previous Scriptures: for God knoweth and beholdeth his
servants.

Moreover, we have made the Book an heritage to those of our servants whom we
have chosen. Some of them injure themselves by evil deeds; others keep the
midway between good and evil; and others, by the permission of God, outstrip
in goodness; this is the great merit!

Into the gardens of Eden shall they enter: with bracelets of gold and pearl
shall they be decked therein, and therein shall their raiment be of silk:

And they shall say, "Praise be to God who hath put away sorrow from us.
Verily our Lord is Gracious, Grateful,

Who of His bounty hath placed us in a manison that shall abide for ever:
therein no toil shall reach us, and therein no weariness shall touch us."

But for infidels is the fire of Hell; to die shall never be decreed them, nor
shall aught of its torment be made light to them. Thus reward we every
infidel!

And therein shall they cry aloud, "Take us hence, O our Lord! righteousness
will we work, and not what we wrought of old."-"Prolonged we not your days
that whoever would be warned might be warned therein? And the preacher came
to you-

Taste it then."-There is no protector for the unjust.

God truly knoweth the hidden things both of the Heavens and of the Earth: for
He knoweth the very secrets of the breast.

He hath appointed you his vicegerents in the earth: And whoever believeth
not, on him shall be his unbelief; and their unbelief shall only increase for
the unbelievers, hatred at the hands of their Lord:-and their unbelief shall
only increase for the unbelievers their own perdition!

SAY: What think ye of the gods whom ye invoke beside God? Shew me what part
of the earth they have created? Had they a share in the creation of the
Heavens? Have we given them a Book in which they can find proofs that they
are to be called on? Nay, the wicked promise one another only deceits.

Verily God holdeth fast the Heavens and the Earth that they pass not away:
and if they were passing away none could hold them back but He: for He is
Kind, Gracious.

They swore by God with their mightiest oath that should a preacher come to
them they would yield to guidance more than any people: but when the preacher
came to them it only increased in them their estrangement,

Their haughtiness on earth and their plotting of evil! But the plotting of
evil shall only enmesh those who make use of it.5 Look they then for aught
but God's way6 of dealing with the peoples of old? Thou shalt not find any
change in the way of God,-

Yea, thou shalt not find any variableness in the way of God.

Have they never journeyed in the land and seen what hath been the end of
those who flourished before them, though mightier in strength than they? God
is not to be frustrated by aught in the Heavens or in the Earth; for He is
the All-knowing, the All-mighty.

If, moreover, God should chastise men according to their deserts, He would
not leave even a reptile on the back of the earth! But to an appointed time
doth He respite them.

And when their time shall come, then verily God's eye is on his servants.


_______________________

1 See note at Sura [xcvii.] iii. 18. This is one of the passages said to have
originated with Zayd.

2 Not only seas, properly so called, but the great masses of fresh water in
the Nile, Tigris, inland lakes, etc. 3 The Gospel.

4 This idea was probably suggested by Muhammad's reminiscences of the view
from the Cave of Hira, to the north and west of which there is a prospect
thus described by Burckhardt (Travels, p. 176). "The country before us had a
dreary aspect, not a single green spot being visible; barren, black, and grey
hills, and white sandy valleys were the only objects in sight."

5 Lit. shall encompass its people.

6 Method of dealing, i.e., first warning, then punishing.


SURA VII.-AL ARAF [LXXXVII.]

MECCA.-205 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM. SAD.1 A Book hath been sent down to thee: therefore let there
be no difficulty in thy breast concerning it: to the intent that thou mayest
warn thereby, and that it may be a monition to the faithful.

Follow ye what hath been sent down to you from your Lord; and follow no
masters beside Him. How little will ye be monished!

How many cities have we destroyed! By night, or while they were in their
midday slumber, did our wrath reach them!

And what was their cry when our wrath reached them, but to say, "Verily, we
have been impious."

Surely, therefore, will we call those to account, to whom an Apostle hath
been sent, and of the sent ones themselves will we certainly demand a
reckoning.

And with knowledge will we tell them of their deeds, for we were not absent
from them.

The weighing2 on that day, with justice! and they whose balances shall be
heavy, these are they who shall be happy.

And they whose balances shall be light, these are they who have lost their
souls, for that to our signs they were unjust:

And now have we stabilished you on the earth, and given you therein the
supports of life. How little do ye give thanks!

We created you; then fashioned you; then said we to the angels, "Prostrate
yourselves unto Adam: and they prostrated them all in worship, save Eblis: He
was not among those who prostrated themselves.

To him said God: "What hath hindered thee from prostrating thyself in worship
at my bidding?" He said, "Nobler am I than he: me hast thou created of fire;
of clay hast thou created him."

He said, "Get thee down hence: Paradise is no place for thy pride: Get thee
gone then; one of the despised shalt thou be."

He said, "Respite me till the day when mankind shall be raised from the
dead."

He said, "One of the respited shalt thou be."

He said, "Now, for that thou hast caused me to err, surely in thy straight
path will I lay wait for them:

Then will I surely come upon them from before, and from behind, and from
their right hand, and from their left, and thou shalt not find the greater
part of them to be thankful."

He said, "Go forth from it, a scorned, a banished one! Whoever of them shall
follow thee, I will surely fill hell with you, one and all.

And, O Adam! dwell thou and thy wife in Paradise, and eat ye whence ye will,
but to this tree approach not, lest ye become of the unjust doers."

Then Satan whispered them to shew them their nakedness, which had been hidden
from them both. And he said, "This tree3 hath your Lord forbidden you, only
lest ye should become angels, or lest ye should become immortals."

And he sware to them both, "Verily I am unto you one who counselleth aright."

So he beguiled them by deceits: and when they had tasted of the tree, their
nakedness appeared to them, and they began to sew together upon themselves
the leaves of the garden. And their Lord called to them, "Did I not forbid
you this tree, and did I not say to you, 'Verily, Satan is your declared
enemy.' "

They said, "O our Lord! With ourselves have we dealt unjustly: if thou
forgive us not and have pity on us, we shall surely be of those who perish."

He said, "Get ye down, the one of you an enemy4 to the other; and on earth
shall be your dwelling, and your provision for a season."

He said, "On it shall ye live, and on it shall ye die, and from it shall ye
be taken forth."

O children of Adam! now have we sent down to you raiment to hide your
nakedness, and splendid garments; but the raiment of piety-this is best. This
is one of the signs of God, that man haply may reflect.

O children of Adam! let not Satan bring you into trouble, as he drove forth
your parents from the Garden, by despoiling them of their raiment, that he
might cause them to see their nakedness: He truly seeth you, he and his
comrades, whence ye see not them. Verily, we have made the Satans tutelars of
those who believe not.

And when the wicked commit some filthy deed, they say, "We found our fathers
practising it, and to us hath God commanded it"-SAY: God enjoineth not filthy
deeds. Will ye speak of God ye know not what?

SAY: My Lord hath enjoined what is right. Turn your faces therefore towards
every place where he is worshipped5 and call upon him with sincere religion.
As he created you, to him shall ye return: some hath he guided, and some hath
he justly left in error, because they have taken the Satans as their tutelars
beside God, and have deemed that they were guided aright.

O children of Adam! wear your goodly apparel when ye repair to any mosque,6
and eat ye and drink; but exceed not, for He loveth not those who exceed.

SAY: Who hath prohibited God's goodly raiment, and the healthful viands which
He hath provided for his servants? SAY: These are for the faithful in this
present life, but above all on the day of the resurrection. Thus make we our
signs plain for people of knowledge.

SAY: Truly my Lord hath forbidden filthy actions whether open or secret, and
iniquity, and unjust violence, and to associate with God that for which He
hath sent down no warranty, and to speak of God that ye know not.

Every nation hath its set time. And when their time is come, they shall not
retard it an hour; and they shall not advance it.

O children of Adam! there shall come to you Apostles from among yourselves,
rehearsing my signs to you; and whoso shall fear God and do good works, no
fear shall be upon them, neither shall they be put to grief.

But they who charge our signs with falsehood, and turn away from them in
their pride, shall be inmates of the fire: for ever shall they abide therein.

And who is worse than he who deviseth a lie of God, or treateth our signs as
lies? To them shall a portion here below be assigned in accordance with the
Book of our decrees, until the time when our messengers,7 as they receive
their souls, shall say, "Where are they on whom ye called beside God?" They
shall say: "Gone from us." And they shall witness against themselves that
they were infidels.

He shall say, "Enter ye into the Fire with the generations of Djinn and men
who have preceded you. So oft as a fresh generation entereth, it shall curse
its sister, until when they have all reached it, the last comers shall say to
the former, 'O our Lord! these are they who led us astray: assign them
therefore a double torment of the fire:"' He will say, "Ye shall all have
double." But of this are ye ignorant.

And the former of them shall say to the latter, "What advantage have ye over
us? Taste ye therefore the torment for that which ye have done."

Verily, they who have charged our signs with falsehood and have turned away
from them in their pride, Heaven's gates shall not be opened to them, nor
shall they enter Paradise, until the camel8 passeth through the eye of the
needle. After this sort will we recompense the transgressors.

They shall make their bed in Hell, and above them shall be coverings of fire!
After this sort will we recompense the evil doers.

But as to those who have believed and done the things which are right (we
will lay on no one a burden beyond his power) These shall be inmates of
Paradise: for ever shall they abide therein;

And we will remove whatever rancour was in their bosoms: rivers shall roll at
their feet: and they shall say, "Praise be to God who hath guided us hither!
We had not been guided had not God guided us! Of a surety the Apostles of our
Lord came to us with truth." And a voice shall cry to them, "This is
Paradise, of which, as the meed of your works, ye are made heirs."

And the inmates of Paradise shall cry to the inmates of the fire, "Now have
we found what our Lord promised us to be true. Have ye too found what your
Lord promised you to be true?" And they shall answer, "Yes." And a Herald
shall proclaim between them: "The curse of God be upon the evil doers,

Who turn men aside from the way of God, and seek to make it crooked, and who
believe not in the life to come!"

And between them shall be a partition; and on the wall AL ARAF9 shall be men
who will know all,10 by their tokens, and they shall cry to the inmates of
Paradise, "Peace be on you!" but they shall not yet enter it, although they
long to do so.

And when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the Fire, they shall
say, "O our Lord! place us not with the offending people."

And they who are upon Al Araf shall cry to those whom they shall know by
their tokens, "Your amassings and your pride have availed you nothing.

Are these they on whom ye sware God would not bestow mercy? Enter ye11 into
Paradise! where no fear shall be upon you, neither shall ye be put to grief."

And the inmates of the fire shall cry to the inmates of Paradise: "Pour upon
us some water, or of the refreshments12 God hath given you?" They shall say,
"Truly God hath forbidden both to unbelievers,

Who made their religion a sport and pastime, and whom the life of the world
hath deceived." This day therefore will we forget them, as they forgot the
meeting of this their day, and as they did deny our signs.

And now have we brought them the Book: with knowledge have we explained it; a
guidance and a mercy to them that believe.

What have they to wait for now but its interpretation? When its
interpretation13 shall come, they who aforetime were oblivious of it shall
say, "The Prophets of our Lord did indeed bring the truth; shall we have any
intercessor to intercede for us? or could we not be sent back? Then would we
act otherwise than we have acted." But they have ruined themselves; and the
deities of their own devising have fled from them!

Your Lord is God, who in six days created the Heavens and the Earth, and then
mounted the throne: He throweth the veil of night over the day: it pursueth
it swiftly: and he created the sun and the moon and the stars, subjected to
laws by His behest: Is not all creation and its empire His? Blessed be God
the Lord of the Worlds!

Call upon your Lord with lowliness and in secret, for He loveth not
transgressors.

And commit not disorders on the earth after it hath been well ordered; and
call on Him with fear and longing desire: Verily the mercy of God is nigh
unto the righteous.

And He it is who sendeth forth the winds as the heralds of his compassion,14
until they bring up the laden clouds, which we drive along to some dead land
and send down water thereon, by which we cause an upgrowth of all kinds of
fruit.-Thus will we bring forth the dead. Haply ye will reflect.

In a rich soil, its plants spring forth abundantly by the will of its Lord,
and in that which is bad, they spring forth but scantily. Thus do We
diversify our signs for those who are thankful.

Of old sent We Noah to his people,15 and he said, "O my people! worship God.
Ye have no God but Him: indeed I fear for you the chastisement of the great
day."

The chiefs of his people said, "We clearly see that thou art in a palpable
error."

He said, "There is no error in me, O my people! but I am a messenger from the
Lord of the Worlds.

I bring to you the messages of my Lord, and I give you friendly counsel; for
I know from God what ye know not.

Marvel ye that a Warning should come to you from your Lord through one of
yourselves, that he may warn you, and that ye may fear for yourselves, and
that haply ye may find mercy?"

But they treated him as a liar: so we delivered him and those who were with
him in the ark, and we drowned those who charged our signs with falsehood;
for they were a blind people.

And to Ad16 we sent their brother Houd.17 "O my people!" said he, "worship
God: ye have no other god than Him: Will ye not then fear Him?"

Said the unbelieving chiefs among his people, "We certainly perceive that
thou art unsound of mind; and we surely deem thee an impostor."

He said, "O my people! it is not unsoundness of mind in me, but I am an
Apostle from the Lord of the Worlds.

The messages of my Lord do I announce to you, and I am your faithful18
counsellor.

Marvel ye that a warning hath come to you from your Lord through one of
yourselves that He may warn you? Remember how he hath made you the successors
of the people of Noah, and increased you in tallness of stature. Remember
then the favours of God, that it may haply be well with you."

They said, "Art thou come to us in order that we may worship one God alone,
and leave what our fathers worshipped? Then bring that upon us with which
thou threatenest us, if thou be a man of truth."

He said, "Vengeance and wrath shall suddenly light on you from your Lord. Do
ye dispute with me about names that you and your fathers have given your
idols, and for which God hath sent you down no warranty? Wait ye then, and I
too will wait with you."

And we delivered him, and those who were on his side, by our mercy, and we
cut off, to the last man, those who had treated our signs as lies, and who
were not believers.

And to Themoud we sent their brother Saleh.19 He said, O my people! worship
God: ye have no other god than Him: now hath a clear proof of my mission come
to you from your Lord, this she-camel of God being a sign to you: therefore
let her go at large to pasture on God's earth: and touch her not to harm her,
lest a grievous chastisement seize you.

And remember how he hath made you successors to the Adites, and given you
dwellings on the earth, so that on its plains ye build castles, and hew out
houses in the hills. And bear in mind the benefits of God, and lay not the
earth waste with deeds of licence.

Said the chiefs of his people puffed up with pride, to those who were
esteemed weak, even to those of them who believed, "What! know ye for certain
that Saleh is sent by his Lord?" They said, "Truly we believe in that with
which he hath been sent."

Then said those proud men, "Verily, we reject that in which ye believe."

And they ham-strung the she-camel, and rebelled against their Lord's command,
and said, "O Saleh, let thy menaces be accomplished upon us if thou art one
of the Sent Ones."

Then the earthquake surprised them; and in the morning they were found dead
on their faces in their dwellings.

So he turned away from them, and said, "O my people! I did indeed announce to
you the message of my Lord: and I gave you faithful counsel, but ye love not
faithful counsellors.20

We also sent Lot, when he said to his people, commit ye this filthy deed in
which no creature hath gone before you?

Come ye to men, instead of women, lustfully? Ye are indeed a people given up
to excess.

But the only answer of his people was to say, "Turn them out of your city,
for they are men who vaunt them pure."

And we delivered him and his family, except his wife; she was of those who
lingered:

And we rained a rain upon them: and see what was the end of the wicked!

And we sent to Madian21 their brother Shoaib. He said, "O my people! worship
God; ye have no other God than Him: now hath a clear sign come to you from
your Lord: give therefore the full in measures and weights; take from no man
his chattels, and commit no disorder on the earth after it has been made so
good. This will be better for you, if you will believe it.

And lay not in ambush by every road in menacing sort; nor mislead him who
believeth in God, from His way, nor seek to make it crooked; and remember
when ye were few and that he multiplied you, and behold what hath been the
end of the authors of disorder!

And if a part of you believe in that with which I am sent, and a part of you
believe not, then wait steadfastly until God shall judge between us, for He
is the best of judges."

Said the chiefs of his people puffed up with pride, "We will surely banish
thee, O Shoaib, and thy fellow-believers from our cities, unless indeed ye
shall come back to our religion." "What!" said he, "though we abhor it?

Now shall we have devised a lie concerning God, if after he hath delivered us
from your religion we shall return to it; nor can we return to it, unless by
the will of God our Lord: our Lord embraceth all things in his ken. In God
have we put our trust: O our Lord! decide between us and between our people,
with truth; for the best to decide art Thou."

And the chiefs of his people who believed not, said, "If ye follow Shoaib, ye
shall then surely perish."

An earthquake therefore surprised them, and they were found in the morning
dead on their faces, in their dwellings.

Those who had treated Shoaib as an impostor, became as though they had never
dwelt in them: they who treated Shoaib as an impostor, were they that
perished.

So he turned away from them and said, O my people! I proclaimed to you the
messages of my Lord, and I counselled you aright; but how should I be grieved
for a people who do not believe?

Nor did we ever send a prophet to any city without afflicting its people with
adversity and trouble, that haply they might humble them.22

Then changed we their ill for good, until they waxed wealthy, and said, "Of
old did troubles and blessings befall our fathers:" therefore did we seize
upon them suddenly when they were unaware.

But if that the people of these cities had believed and feared us, we would
surely have laid open to them blessings out of the Heaven and the Earth: but
they treated our signs as lies, and we took vengeance on them for their
deeds.

Were the people, therefore, of those cities secure that our wrath would not
light on them by night, while they were slumbering?

Were the people of those cities secure that our wrath would not light on them
in broad day, while they were disporting themselves?

Did they, therefore, deem themselves secure from the deep counsel23 of God?
But none deem themselves secure from the deep counsel of God, save those who
perish.

Is it not proved to those who inherit this land after its ancient occupants,
that if we please we can smite them for their sins, and put a seal upon their
hearts, that they hearken not?

We will tell thee the stories of these cities. Their apostles came to them
with clear proofs of their mission; but they would not believe in what they
had before treated as imposture.-Thus doth God seal up the hearts of the
unbelievers-

And we found not of their covenant in most of them; but we found most of them
to be perverse.

Then after them we sent Moses with our signs to Pharaoh and his nobles, who
acted unjustly in their regard. But see what was the end of the corrupt
doers!

And Moses said, "O Pharaoh! verily I am an apostle from the Lord of the
Worlds.

Nothing but truth is it right for me to speak of God. Now am I come to you
from your Lord with a proof of my mission; send away, therefore, the children
of Israel with me." He said, "If thou comest with a sign, shew it if thou art
a man of truth."

So he threw down his rod, and lo! it distinctly became a serpent.

Then drew he forth his hand, and lo! it was white24 to the beholders.

The nobles of Pharaoh's people said, "Verily, this is an expert enchanter:

Fain would he expel you from your land: what then do ye order to be done?"

They said, "Put25 him and his brother off awhile, and send round men to your
cities who shall muster

And bring to thee every skilled enchanter."

And the enchanters came to Pharaoh. Said they, "Shall we surely be rewarded
if we prevail?"

He said, "Yes; and ye certainly shall be near my person."

They said, "O Moses! either cast thou down thy rod first, or we will cast
down ours."

He said, "Cast ye down." And when they had cast them down they enchanted the
people's eyes, and made them afraid; for they had displayed a great
enchantment.

Then spake we unto Moses, "Throw down thy rod;" and lo! it devoured their
lying wonders.

So the truth was made strong, and that which they had wrought proved vain:

And they were vanquished on the spot, and drew back humiliated.

But the other enchanters prostrated themselves adoring:

Said they, "We believe on the Lord of the Worlds,

The Lord of Moses and Aaron."

Said Pharaoh, "Have ye believed on him, ere I have given you leave? This
truly is a plot which ye have plotted in this my city, in order to drive out
its people. But ye shall see in the end what shall happen.

I will surely cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides; then will I have
you all crucified."

They said, "Verily, to our Lord do we return;

And thou takest vengeance on us only because we have believed on the signs of
our Lord when they came to us. Lord! pour out constancy upon us, and cause us
to die Muslims."

Then said the chiefs of Pharaoh's people-"Wilt thou let Moses and his people
go to spread disorders in our land, and desert thee and thy gods?" He said,
"We will cause their male children to be slain and preserve their females
alive: and verily we shall be masters over them."

Said Moses to his people, "Cry unto God for help, and bear up patiently, for
the earth is God's: to such of His servants as He pleaseth doth He give it as
a heritage; and for those that fear Him is a happy issue."

"We have been oppressed," they said, "before thou camest to us, and since
thou hast been with us:" "Perhaps," said he, "your Lord will destroy your
enemy, and will make you his successors in the land, and He will see how ye
will act therein."

Already had we chastised the people of Pharaoh with dearth and scarcity of
fruits, that haply they might take warning:

And when good fell to their lot they said, "This is our due." But if ill
befel them, they regarded Moses and his partisans as (the birds) of evil
omen.26 Yet, was not their evil omen from God? But most of them knew it not.

And they said, "Whatever sign thou bring us for our enchantment, we will not
believe on thee."

And we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the kummal (lice) and the
frogs and the blood,-clear signs27-but they behaved proudly, and were a
sinful people.

And when any plague fell upon them, they said, "O Moses! pray for us to thy
Lord, according to that which he hath covenanted with thee: Truly if thou
take off the plague from us, we will surely believe thee, and will surely
send the children of Israel with thee." But when we had taken off the plague
from them, and the time which God had granted them had expired,28 behold!
they broke their promise.

Therefore we took vengeance on them and drowned them in the sea, because they
treated our signs as falsehoods and were heedless of them.

And we gave to the people who had been brought so low, the eastern and the
western lands, which we had blessed as an heritage: and the good word of thy
Lord was fulfilled on the children of Israel because they had borne up with
patience: and we destroyed the works and the structures of Pharaoh and his
people:

And we brought the children of Israel across the sea, and they came to a
people who gave themselves up to their idols. They said, "O Moses! make us a
god, as they have gods." He said, "Verily, ye are an ignorant people:

For the worship they practise29 will be destroyed, and that which they do, is
vain."

He said, "Shall I seek any other god for you than God, when it is He who hath
preferred you above all other peoples?"

And remember when we rescued you from the people of Pharaoh they had laid on
you a cruel affliction; they slew your sons, and let only your daughters
live, and in this was a great trial from your Lord.

And we appointed a meeting with Moses for thirty nights, which we completed
with ten other nights, so that his whole time with his Lord30 amounted to
forty nights. Then said Moses to his brother Aaron, "Take thou my place among
my people, and act rightly, and follow not the way of the corrupt doers."

And when Moses came at our set time and his Lord spake with him, he said, "O
Lord, shew thyself to me, that I may look upon thee." He said, "Thou shalt
not see Me; but look towards the mount, and if it abide firm in its place,
then shalt thou see Me." And when God manifested Himself to the mountain he
turned it to dust! and Moses fell in a swoon.

And when he came to himself, he said, "Glory be to thee! To thee do I turn in
penitence, and I am the first of them that believe."

He said, "O Moses! thee above all men have I chosen by my commissions, and by
my speaking to thee. Take therefore what I have brought thee, and be one of
those who render thanks.

And we wrote for him upon the tables a monition concerning every matter, and
said, "Receive them thyself with steadfastness, and command thy people to
receive them for the observance of its most goodly precepts:-I will shew you
the abode of the wicked."

The unjustly proud ones of the earth will I turn aside from my signs, for
even if they see every sign they will not believe them; and if they see the
path of uprightness, they will not take it for their path, but if they see
the path of error, for their path will they take it.

This,-for that they treated our signs as lies, and were heedless of them.

Vain will be the works of those who treated our signs, and the meeting of the
life to come, as lies! Shall they be rewarded but as they have wrought?

And the people of Moses took during his absence a calf made of their
ornaments, and ruddy like gold, and lowing.31 Saw they not that it could not
speak to them, nor guide them in the way?

Yet they took if for a God and became offenders!

But when they repented, and saw that they had erred, they said, Truly if our
Lord have not mercy on us, and forgive us, we shall surely be of those who
perish.

And when Moses returned to his people, wrathful, angered, he said, "Evil is
it that ye have done next upon my departure. Would ye hasten on the judgments
of your Lord?" And he threw down the tables, and seized his brother by the
head and dragged him unto him. Said he, "Son of my mother! the people thought
me weak, and had well nigh slain me. Make not mine enemies to rejoice over
me, and place me not among the wrong doers."

He said, "O Lord, forgive me and my brother, and bring us into thy mercy; for
of those who shew mercy thou art the most merciful."

Verily as to those who took the calf as a god, wrath from their Lord shall
overtake them, and shame in this present life: for thus recompense we the
devisers of a lie.

But to those who have done evil, then afterwards repent and believe, thy Lord
will thereafter be Lenient, Merciful.

And when the anger of Moses was stilled, he took up the tables; and in their
writing was guidance and mercy for those who dread their Lord.

And Moses chose seventy men of his people for a meeting appointed by us. And
when the earthquake overtook them, he said, "O my Lord! if it had been thy
pleasure, thou hadst destroyed them and me ere this! wilt thou destroy us for
what our foolish ones have done? It is nought but thy trial: thou wilt
mislead by it whom thou wilt, and guide whom thou wilt. Our guardian, thou!
Forgive us then and have mercy on us; for of those who forgive art thou the
best:

And write down for us what is good in this world, as well as in the world to
come, for to thee are we guided." He said, "My chastisement shall fall on
whom I will, and my mercy embraceth all things, and I write it down for those
who shall fear me, and pay the alms, and believe in our signs,

Who shall follow the Apostle, the unlettered32 Prophet-whom they shall find
described with them in the Law and Evangel. What is right will he enjoin
them, and forbid them what is wrong, and will allow them healthful viands and
prohibit the impure, and will ease them of their burden, and of the yokes
which were upon them; and those who shall believe in him, and strengthen him,
and help him,33 and follow the light34 which hath been sent down with him,-
these are they with whom it shall be well."

SAY to them: O men! Verily I am God's apostle to you all;

Whose is the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth! Therefore believe on
God but He! He maketh alive and killeth! Therefore believe on God, and his
Apostle-the unlettered Prophet-who believeth in God and his word. And follow
him that ye may be guided aright.

And among the people of Moses there is a certain number35 who guide others
with truth, and practise what is right according to it.

And we divided the Israelites into twelve tribes, as nations; and we revealed
unto Moses when the people asked drink of him-"Strike the rock with thy
staff:" and there gushed forth from it twelve fountains-the men all knew
their drinking places. And we caused clouds to overshadow them, and sent down
upon them the manna and the quails. . . .  "Eat of the good things with which
we have supplied you." But it was not us whom they injured, but they injured
their own selves:

And when it was said to them, "Dwell in this city, and eat therefrom what ye
will, and say 'Hittat' (forgiveness), and enter the gate with prostrations;
then will we pardon your offences,-we will give increase to the doers of
good:"

But the ungodly ones among them changed that word into another than that
which had been told them:36 therefore sent we forth wrath out of Heaven upon
them for their wrong doings.

And37 ask them about the city that stood by the sea, when its inhabitants
broke the Sabbath; when their fish came to them on their Sabbath day
appearing openly, but came not to them on the day when they kept no Sabbath.
Thus did we make trial of them, for that they were evildoers.38

And when some of them said, why warn ye those whom God would destroy or
chastise with terrible chastisement? they said, For our own excuse with your
Lord; and that they may fear Him.

And when they forgot their warnings, we delivered those who had forbidden
evil; and we inflicted a severe chastisement on those who had done wrong, for
that they were evil doers.

But when they proudly persisted in that which was forbidden, we said to them,
"Become scouted apes;" and then thy Lord declared that until the day of the
resurrection, he would surely send against them39 (the Jews) those who should
evil entreat and chastise them: for prompt is thy Lord to punish; and He is
Forgiving, Merciful.

And we have divided them upon the Earth as peoples: some of them are upright
and some are otherwise; and by good things and by evil things have we proved
them, to the intent that they might return to us.

And they have had successors to succeed them: they have inherited the Book:
they have received the passing good things of this lower world,40 and say,
"It will be forgiven us." Yet if the like good things came to them again,
they would again receive them. But hath there not been received on their part
a covenant through the Scripture that they should speak nought of God but the
truth? And yet they study its contents. But the mansion of the next world
hath more value for those who fear God-Do ye not then comprehend?-

And who hold fast the Book, and observe prayer: verily, we will not suffer
the reward of the righteous to perish.

And when we shook the mount41 over them as if it had been a shadow, and they
thought it falling upon them, . . .  "Receive, said we, with steadfastness
what we have brought you, and remember what is therein to the end that ye may
fear God."

And when thy Lord brought forth their descendants from the reins of the sons
of Adam and took them to witness against themselves, "Am I not," said He,
"your Lord?" They said, "Yes, we witness it." This we did, lest ye should say
on the day of Resurrection, "Truly, of this were we heedless, because
uninformed;"

Or lest ye should say, "Our fathers, indeed, aforetime joined other gods with
our God, and we are their seed after them: wilt thou destroy us for the
doings of vain men?"

Thus make we our signs clear: that haply they may return to God.

Recite to them42 the history of him43 to whom we vouchsafed our signs, and
who departed from them, so that Satan followed him, and he became one of the
seduced.

Had we pleased, we had certainly thereby exalted him; but he crouched to the
earth and followed his own lust: his likeness, therefore, is as that of the
dog which lolls out his tongue, whether thou chase him away, or leave him
alone! Such is the likeness of those who treat our signs as lies. Tell them
this tale then, that they may consider.

Evil the likeness of those who treat our signs as lies! and it is themselves
they injure.

He whom God guideth is the guided, and they whom he misleadeth shall be the
lost.

Many, moreover, of the Djinn and men have we created for Hell. Hearts have
they with which they understand not, and eyes have they with which they see
not, and ears have they with which they hearken not. They are like the
brutes: Yea, they go more astray: these are the heedless.

Most excellent titles hath God:44 by these call ye on Him, and stand aloof
from those who pervert45 his titles. For what they have done shall they be
repaid!

And among those whom we have created are a people who guide others with
truth, and in accordance therewith act justly.

But as for those who treat our signs as lies, we will gradually bring them
down by means of which they know not:

And though I lengthen their days, verily, my stratagem shall prove effectual.

Will they not bethink them that their companion Muhammad is not djinn-
possessed? Yes, his office is only that of plain warner.

Will they not look forth on the realms of the Heaven and of the Earth, and on
all things which God hath made, to see whether haply their end be not drawing
on? And in what other book will they believe46 who reject the Koran?

No other guide for him whom God shall mislead! He will leave them distraught
in their wanderings.

They will ask thee of the Hour-for what time is its coming fixed? SAY: The
knowledge of it is only with my Lord: none shall manifest it in its time but
He: it is the burden47 of the Heavens and of the Earth: not otherwise than on
a sudden will it come on you.48

They will ask thee as if thou wast privy to it: SAY: The knowledge of it is
with none but God. But most men know not this.

SAY: I have no control over what may be helpful or hurtful to me, but as God
willeth. Had I the knowledge of his secrets, I should revel in the good, and
evil should not touch me. But I am only a warner, and an announcer of good
tidings to those who believe.

He it is who hath created you from a single person, and from him brought
forth his wife that he might dwell with her: and when he had known her, she
bore a light burden, and went about with it; and when it became heavy, they
both cried to God their Lord, "If thou give us a perfect child we will surely
be of the thankful."

Yet when God had given them a perfect child,49 they50 joined partners with
Him in return for what he had given them. But high is God above the partners
they joined with Him!

What! Will they join those with Him who cannot create anything, and are
themselves created, and have no power to help them, or to help themselves?

And if ye summon them to "the guidance," they will not follow you! It is the
same to them whether ye summon them or whether ye hold your peace!

Truly they whom ye call on beside God, are, like yourselves, His servants!
Call on them then, and let them answer you, if what ye say of them be true!

Have they feet to walk with? Have they hands to hold with? Have they eyes to
see with? Have they ears to hear with? SAY: Call on these joint gods of
yours; then make your plot against me, and delay it not.

Verily, my Lord is God, who hath sent down "the Book;" and He is the
protector of the righteous.

But they whom ye call on beside Him, can lend you no help, nor can they help
themselves:

And if ye summon them to "the guidance," they hear you not: thou seest them
look towards thee, but they do not see!

Make the best of things;51 and enjoin what is just, and withdraw from the
ignorant:

And if stirrings to evil from Satan stir thee, fly thou for refuge to God: He
verily heareth, knoweth!

Verily, they who fear God, when some phantom from Satan toucheth them,
remember Him, and lo! they see clearly.

Their Brethren52 will only continue them in error, and cannot preserve
themselves from it.

And when thou bringest not a verse (sign) of the Koran to them, they say,
"Hast thou not yet patched it up?53 SAY: I only follow my Lord's utterances
to me. This is a clear proof on the part of your Lord, and a guidance and a
mercy for those who believe.

And when the Koran is read, then listen ye to it and keep silence, that haply
ye may obtain mercy.

And think within thine own self on God, with lowliness and with fear and
without loud spoken words, at even and at morn; and be not one of the
heedless.

Verily they who are round about thy Lord disdain not His service. They praise
Him and prostrate themselves before Him.


_______________________

1 The initial letters, it has been conjectured, of (Amara li Muhammad
sahdiq), thus spake to me Muhammad the truthful. But see Sura 1xviii. p. 32.
The first part of this Sura was perhaps revealed when the Arabians were
assembled at the Pilgrimage. See verse 29.

2 A figure of frequent occurence in the Talmud. See Tr. Rosh. Haschana, 17a.

3 Comp. Sura xx. 118, p. 101.

4 Gen. iii. 15.

5 Lit. towards each Mosque, i.e. towards the kibla of each Mosque. The word
mosque, mesjid, however, is usually applied only to that of Mecca. The common
term in use for larger places of worship is djami, a word unknown, in that
sense, to the Koran.

6 For full information as to the clothing of the ancient Arabians see Freyt.
Einl. pp. 295 327. The Koreisch (we are told in Sirat Arrasul, fol. 26, and
Beidh.), in order to instil a deep respect for the Caaba and other holy
places into the minds of the Arabians, had forbidden all food during the
processions, and required that no clothes, except those borrowed from
Meccans, should be worn, or that those who wore their own should devote them
to God as holy vestments. The consequence was that most of the pilgrims
visited the holy places in perfect nudity. Hence the precept in the text.

7 The Angels of Death.

8 Comp. Matth. xix. 24; Mark x. 25; Luke xviii. 25. By the change of a single
vowel in the Arabic word for camel, we obtain the rendering, cable. In the
Rabbinic form of the proverb, however, the elephant is substituted for the
camel, which confirms the usual rendering and reading.

9 "On this wall (the name of which is derived from Arafa, 'to know,' with
allusion to the employment of those upon it) will stand those whose good and
evil works are equal, and are not, therefore, deserving of either Paradise or
Gehenna. The idea, which is analogous to that of Purgatory, may be derived
from the Talmud. Thus in the Midrasch on Eccl. vii. 14, 'How much space is
there between the two' (Paradise and Hell)? R. Jochanan saith, a wall; R.
Acha, a span: others hold them to be so close that a person may see from one
into the other." See Plato's Phaed. 62.

10 That is, they will know the inmates of Paradise by their whiteness, and
the people of Hell by the blackness of their faces.

11 That is, ye believers: to whom the speakers on Al Araf are supposed to
turn.

12 The fruits of Paradise. Comp. Luke xvi. 19.

13 The fulfilment of its promises and threats.

14 The rain. Thus, the Rabbins call the rain "the might and power of God,"
Comp. Tract Tanith, fol. I, and connect it with the Resurrection, Tract
Berachoth, fol. 33.

15 The Rabbins in like manner describe the mission of Noah. Comp. Sanhedr.
108. Midr. Rabbah on Gen. par. 30, 33; and on Eccl. 9, 14. See Sura [lxxv.]
xi. 40.

16 The two tribes of Ad and Themoud-the latter of whom is mentioned by Diod.
Sic. and Ptolemy-lay to the north of Mecca in the direct line of traffic
between the countries to the north and to the south, and both probably
disappeared with its cessation, when the Arabs were no longer held in check
by the Romans. The traditions adopted by Muhammad attribute this to the
divine vengeance, throughout the Koran, and were derived by him from the
popular legends of Arabia. See Freyt. Einl. p. 12.

17 On Houd, see Geiger, pp. 113 119. He supposes him to be the Eber of the
Bible. But Mr. Muir suggests that both Houd and Saleh may have been
persecuted Jewish or Christian emissaries and teachers, whose rejection was
thus recast by Muhammad. See note on verse 71.

18 Or, entrusted, i.e. with the office of apostle.

19 Saleh-according to Bochart, the Peleg of Gen. xi. 16. D'Herbelot, B. O.
740, makes him the Schelah of Gen. xi. 13. See v. 63, n. and p. 220, n.

20 It is just possible that the act of Koleib, chief of the Banu Taghlib
tribe, in killing the milch camel of Bas≈±s, a female relative of his wife of
Bani-Bakr lineage-which led to a forty years' war between these two tribes,
A.D. 490-may have been worked up by Muhammad into this account of the
persecutions of Saleh.

21 See Sura xxiv. 176, p. 109.

22 This verse may contain an implied reference to the famine with which Mecca
had been visited, and fix the date of this part of the Sura. Comp. verse 127.

23 Lit. plot, stratagem.

24 Comp. the passage from Pirke R. Eliezer, c. 48, who makes Moses perform
this miracle in the presence of Pharaoh, which the Scripture (Ex. vii.)
account does not. The Muhammadan tradition is that Moses was a black.

25 Lit. cause him to hope, temporise with him.

26 Lit. male ominati sunt. Mar. They traced their calamities to Moses. So
Sale. Kas. But Ullmann. renders, they attributed their misfortunes to the
predictions of Moses.

27 In Suras [lxvii.] xvii. and [lxviii.] Muhammad speaks of nine plagues. The
flood is not mentioned in the Scripture.

28 Lit. when we removed from them the plague until a period at which they
should arrive.

29 Lit. that in which these are.

30 Lit. the set time of his Lord was fulfilled in forty nights.

31 Sale and others render having a body, corporeal, of which the commentators
give no satisfactory explanation. I have adopted that given by Freytag in v.
That the calf lowed in consequence of Sama¬âl having entered into it, is one
of the traditions of the Talmud. Pirke R. Eliezer, c. 45.

32 Compare Sura [lxxxi.] xxix. 47, [xciv.] lxxii. 2, [xci.] ii. 73. The word
ummyy is derived from ummah, a nation, and means Gentile; it here refers to
Muhammad's ignorance, previous to the revelation of Islam, of the ancient
Scriptures. It is equivalent to the Gr. laic, ethnic, and to the term gojim,
as applied by the Jews to those unacquainted with the Scriptures. There can,
however, be no doubt that Muhammad-in spite of his assertions to the
contrary, with the view of proving his inspiration-was well acquainted with
the Bible histories. He wished to appear ignorant in order to raise the
elegance of the Koran into a miracle. For the passages of Scripture said to
foretel Muhammad, see Pocock's Sp. Hist. Ar. p. 188, ed. White.

33 If these words, as N√∂ldeke supposes, contain an allusion to the Ansars, it
is likely that this verse was added at Medina. The epithet Al-Ummy (the
unlettered) does not, thus, occur in Meccan Suras.

34 The Koran.

35 Pirke R. Eliezer, 45, explains Ex. xxxii. 26, of the tribe of Levi, as not
having been implicated with the other tribes in the sin of the golden calf.

36 The Jews changed hittat, absolution, indulgence, into habbat, corn.

37 This and the next six verses are supposed to have been added at Medina.

38 Comp. Sura [xci.] ii. 61. No trace of this legend is to be found in the
Talmudists. The city is said to have been Aila (Elath) on the Red Sea.

39 Perhaps in allusion to Deut. xxviii. 49, 50.

40 As bribes to pervert Scripture, etc.

41 Sinai-which, however, is not mentioned in the Koran as the place where the
law was given. Comp. "I will cover you with the mountain like a roof." Abodah
Sar. 2, 2. Thus also in Tract Sabbath, f. 88, 1, "R. Avdimi . . . saith,
These words teach us that the Holy One, blessed be He, turned the mountain
over them like a vessel, and said to them, If ye will receive the law, well;
but if not, there shall be your grave." This tradition is still held by the
Jews. See D. Lewis Pent. Prayers, fol. 150. Its origin is a misunderstanding
of Ex. xix. 17, rightly rendered in the E. version at the nether part of the
mountain.

42 To the Jews.

43 Balaam. But according to others, a Jew who renounced his faith in
Muhammad.

44 The 99 titles of God, taken from the Koran, are to be found in Maracci,
vol. 11, p. 414, or in Macbride's Religion of the Mohammedans, p. 121. To
facilitate the repetition of these names, the Muslims use a rosary.

45 In altering the names of God, changing allah into Allat, Elaziz into
Alozza, Mennan into Menat, etc.

46 Lit. and in what declaration after it will they believe?

47 That is, it weighs heavily on the hopes and fears of men, djinn, and
angels.

48 Probably the usual final clause, whence ye looked not for it, should here
be added to make good the rhyme, which is otherwise interrupted in the
original.

49 Some render salihan, well made, rightly shaped; others, virtuous, morally
perfect.

50 And their idolatrous posterity. Beidh.

51 Take or use indulgence; i.e. take men and their actions as they are, and
make all due allowances. Some understand it, of Muhammad's accepting such
voluntary and superfluous alms as the people could spare.

52 That is, those under Satanic influence.

53 Collected or sought it out. Beidh.


SURA XLVI.-AL AHKAF [LXXXVIII.]

MECCA.-35 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

HA. MIM.1 The Revelation (sending down) of this Book is from the Mighty, the
Wise!

We have not created the Heavens and the Earth and all that is between them
otherwise than in truth and for a settled term. But they who believe not,
turn away from their warning.

SAY: What think ye? As for those whom ye invoke beside God, shew me what part
of the earth it is which they have created? Had they a share in the Heavens?
Bring me a Book sent down by them before this Koran, or traces of their
knowledge;2-if ye are men of truth.

And who erreth more than he who, beside God, calleth upon that which shall
not answer him until the day of Resurrection? Yes, they regard not their
invocations;

And when mankind shall be assembled together, they will become their enemies,
and ungratefully disown their worship.

And when our clear signs are recited to them, they who believe not say of the
truth when it cometh to them, "This is plain sorcery."

Will they say, "He hath devised It?" SAY: If I have devised the Koran, then
not one single thing shall ye ever obtain for me from God! He best knoweth
what ye utter in its regard! Witness enough is He between me and you! And He
is the Gracious, the Merciful.

SAY: I am no apostle of new doctrines: neither know I what will be done with
me or you. Only what is revealed to me do I follow, and I am only charged to
warn openly.

SAY: What think ye? If this Book be from God, and ye believe it not, and a
witness of the children of Israel3 witness to its conformity with the Law,
and believe, while ye proudly disdain it . . . ? Ah! God guideth not the
people guilty of such a wrong!

But the infidels say of the believers, "If it were a good Book they would not
have been before us in believing it:"4 And not having submitted to guidance,
they proceed to say, "It is an old lying legend!"

But before the Koran was the Book of Moses, a rule and a mercy; and this Book
confirmeth it (the Pentateuch)-in the Arabic tongue-that those who are guilty
of that wrong may be warned, and as glad tidings to the doers of good.

Assuredly they who say, "Our Lord is God," and take the straight way to Him-
no fear shall come on them, neither shall they be put to grief:

These shall be the inmates of Paradise to remain therein for ever,-the
recompense of their deeds!

Moreover, we have enjoined on man to shew kindness to his parents. With pain
his mother beareth him; with pain she bringeth him forth: and his bearing and
his weaning is thirty months; until when he attaineth his strength, and
attaineth to forty years,5 he saith, "O my Lord! stir me up to be grateful
for thy favours wherewith thou hast favoured me and my parents, and to do
good works which shall please thee: and prosper me in my offspring: for to
thee am I turned, and am resigned to thy will" (am a Muslim).

These are they from whom we will accept their best works, and whose evil
works we will pass by; among the inmates shall they be of Paradise:-a true
promise which they are promised.

But he who saith to his parents, "Fie on you both! Promise ye me that I shall
be taken forth from the grave alive, when whole generations have already
passed away before me?" But they both will implore the help of God, and say,
"Alas for thee! Believe: for the promise of God is true." But he saith, "It
is no more than a fable of the ancients."

These are they in whom the sentence passed on the nations, djinn and men, who
flourished before them, is made good. They shall surely perish.6

And there are grades for all, according to their works, that God may repay
them for their works; and they shall not be dealt with unfairly.

And they who believe not shall one day be set before the fire. "Ye made away
your precious gifts during your life on earth; and ye took your fill of
pleasure in them: This day, therefore, with punishment of shame shall ye be
rewarded, for that ye behaved you proudly and unjustly on the earth, and for
that ye were given to excesses."

Remember, too, the brother of Ad7 when he warned his people in AL AHKAF8-and
before and since his time there have been warners-"Worship none but God:
verily I fear for you the punishment of the great day."

They said, "Art thou come to us to turn us away from our Gods? Bring on us
now the woes which thou threatenest if thou speakest truth."

"That knowledge," said he, "is with God alone: I only proclaim to you the
message with which I am sent. But I perceive that ye are a people sunk in
ignorance."

So when they saw a cloud coming straight for their valleys, they said, "It is
a passing cloud that shall give us rain." "Nay, it is that whose speedy
coming ye challenged a blast wherein is an afflictive punishment:-

It will destroy everything at the bidding of its Lord!" And at morn nought
was to be seen but their empty dwellings! Thus repay we a wicked people.

With power had we endued them, even as with power have we endued you; and we
had given them ears and eyes and hearts: yet neither their eyes, nor their
ears, nor their hearts aided them at all, when once they gainsaid the signs
of God; but that punishment which they had mocked at enveloped them on all
sides.

Of old, too, did we destroy the cities which were round about you; and, in
order that they might return to us, we varied our signs before them.

But did those whom they took for gods beside God as his kindred deities, help
them?9 Nay, they withdrew from them. Such was their delusion, and their
device!

And remember when we turned aside a company of the djinn to thee, that they
might hearken to the Koran: and no sooner were they present at its reading
than they said to each other, "Hist;" and when it was ended, they returned to
their people with warnings.

They said, "O our people! verily we have been listening to a book sent down
since the days of Moses, affirming the previous scriptures; it guideth to the
truth, and to the right way.

O our people! Obey the Summoner of God, and believe in him, that He may
forgive your sins, and rescue you from an afflictive punishment.

And he who shall not respond to God's preacher, yet cannot weaken God's power
on earth, nor shall he have protectors beside Him. These are in obvious
error."

See they not that God who created the Heavens and the Earth, and was not
wearied with their creation, is of power to quicken the dead? Yea, he is for
all things Potent.

And a day is coming when the infidels shall be set before the fire. "Is not
this it in truth?" They shall say, "Aye, by our Lord." He said, "Taste then
the punishment for that ye would not believe."

Bear thou up, then, with patience, as did the Apostles endued with firmness,
and seek not to accelerate their doom. For, on the day when they shall see
that with which they have been menaced,

It shall be as though they had waited but an hour of the day. Enough! shall
any perish save they who transgress?


_______________________

1 See Sura lxviii. p. 32.

2 Of a divine revelation, authorising the worship of other gods than God

3 Abdallah bin Salma, say the commentators.

4 Comp. John vii. 48.

5 Thus Mischn. Aboth, v. 21, "at forty years of age a man comes to
intelligence." This verse refers, it is said by the Sonnites, to Abu Bekr,
afterwards Chalif, who embraced Islam in his 40th year. But this
interpretation was probably invented after his accession to power.

6 Lit. suffer loss.

7 The Prophet Houd.

8 That is, Sandhills; at Taief, to which Muhammad had retired in consequence
of the opposition, etc., of the Meccans. Verses 20-31 are probably misplaced,
as they interrupt the connection between 19 and 32, but appear to belong to
the same period as the rest of the Sura.

9 Thus Ullm. als naheverwandte G√∂tter. But Wahl, denen sie sich mit
gottesdienstlichen Opfer n√§herten. Ad appropinquandum (magis ipsi Deo), by
intercession. Mar. Beidh.


SURA VI.-CATTLE [LXXXIX.]

MECCA.-165 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

PRAISE be to God, who hath created the Heavens and the Earth, and ordained
the darkness and the light! Yet unto their Lord do the infidels give peers!

He it is who created you of clay then decreed the term of your life: and with
Him is another prefixed term for the resurrection. Yet have ye doubts
thereof!

And He is God in the Heavens and on the Earth! He knoweth your secrets and
your disclosures! and He knoweth what ye deserve.

Never did one single sign from among the signs of their Lord come to them,
but they turned away from it;

And now, after it hath reached them, have they treated the truth itself as a
lie. But in the end, a message as to that which they have mocked, shall reach
them.

See they not how many generations we have destroyed before them? We had
settled them on the earth as we have not settled you, and we sent down the
very heavens upon them in copious rains, and we made the rivers to flow
beneath their feet: yet we destroyed them in their sins, and raised up other
generations to succeed them.

And had we sent down to thee a Book written on parchment, and they had
touched it with their hands, the infidels had surely said, "This is nought
but plain sorcery."

They say, too, "Unless an angel be sent down to him. . . ." But if we had
sent down an angel, their judgment would have come on them at once,1 and they
would have had no respite:

And if we had appointed an angel, we should certainly have appointed one in
the form of a man, and we should have clothed him before them in garments
like their own.2

Moreover, apostles before thee have been laughed to scorn: but that which
they laughed to scorn encompassed the mockers among them!

SAY: Go through the land: then see what hath been the end of those who
treated them as liars.

SAY: Whose is all that is in the Heavens and the Earth?

SAY: God's. He had imposed mercy on Himself as a law. He will surely assemble
you on the Resurrection day; there is no doubt of it. They who are the
authors of their own ruin, are they who will not believe.

His, whatsoever hath its dwelling in the night and in the day! and He, the
Hearing, the Knowing!

SAY: Other than God shall I take as Lord, maker of the Heavens and of the
Earth, who nourisheth all, and of none is nourished? SAY: Verily, I am bidden
to be the first of those who surrender them to God (profess Islam): and, be
not thou of those who join gods with God.

SAY: Verily, I fear, should I rebel against my Lord, the punishment of the
great day.

From whomsoever it shall be averted on that day, He will have had mercy on
him: and this will be the manifest bliss.

If God touch thee with trouble, none can take it off but He: and if He visit
thee with good-it is He whose power is over all things;

And He is the Supreme over his servants; and He is the Wise, the Cognisant!

SAY: What thing is weightiest in bearing witness? SAY: God is witness between
me and you; and this Koran hath been revealed to me that I should warn you by
it, and all whom it shall reach. What! will ye really bear witness that there
are other gods with God? SAY: I bear no such witness. SAY: Verily, He is one
God, and truly am guiltless of what ye join with Him.

They to whom we have given the Book, recognise him (Muhammad) as they do
their own children:3 but they who are the authors of their own perdition are
they who will not believe.

And who more wicked than he who inventeth a lie concerning God, or who
treateth our signs as lies? Verily those wicked ones shall not prosper.4

And on "the Day" we will gather them all together: then will we say to those
who joined gods with God, "Where are those companion-gods of yours, as ye
supposed them?"

Then shall they find no other excuse than to say, "By God our Lord! we joined
not companions with Him."

Behold! how they lie against themselves-and the gods of their own inventing
desert them!

Some among them hearken unto thee: but we have cast veils over their hearts
that they should not understand the Koran, and a weight into their ears: and
though they should see all kinds of signs, they will refuse all faith in
them, until when they come to thee, to dispute with thee, the infidels say,
"Verily, this is nothing but fables of the ancients."

And they will forbid it, and depart from it:-but they are only the authors of
their own perdition, and know it not.

If thou couldst see when they shall be set over the fire, and shall say, "Oh!
would we might be sent back! we would not treat the signs of our Lord as
lies! we would be of the believers."

Aye! that hath become clear5 to them which they before concealed; but though
they should return, they would surely go back to that which was forbidden
them; for they are surely liars!

And they say, "There is no other than our life in this world, neither shall
we be raised again."

But if thou couldest see when they shall be set before their Lord! He shall
say to them, "Is not this it6 in truth?" They shall say, "Yea, by our Lord!"
"Taste then," saith He, "the torment, for that ye believed not!"

Lost are they who deny the meeting with God until "the Hour" cometh suddenly
upon them! Then will they say, "Oh, our sighs for past negligence of this
hour!" and they shall bear their burdens on their back! Will not that be evil
with which they shall be burdened?

The life in this world is but a play and pastime; and better surely for men
of godly fear will be the future mansion! Will ye not then comprehend?

Now know we that what they speak vexeth thee:7 But it is not merely thee whom
they charge with falsehood, but the ungodly gainsay the signs of God.

Before thee have apostles already been charged with falsehood: but they bore
the charge and the wrong with constancy, till our help came to them;-for none
can change the words of God. But this history of His Sent Ones hath already
reached thee.

But if their estrangement be grievous to thee, and if thou art able to seek
out an opening into the earth or a ladder into Heaven,8 that thou mightest
bring them a sign. . . .  Yes! But if God pleased, He would surely bring
them, one and all, to the guidance! therefore be not thou one of the
ignorant.

To those only who shall lend an ear will He make answer: as for the dead, God
will raise them up; then unto Him shall they return.

They say, "Unless a sign be sent down to him from his Lord. . . ."  SAY:
Verily, God is able to send down a sign; but the greater part of them know it
not.

No kind of beast is there on earth nor fowl that flieth with its wings, but
is a folk9 like you: nothing have we passed over in the Book:10 then unto
their Lord shall they be gathered.

They who gainsay our signs are deaf, and dumb, in darkness: God will mislead
whom He pleaseth, and whom He pleaseth He will place upon the straight path.

SAY: What think ye? If the punishment of God were to come upon you, or "the
Hour" were to come upon you, will ye cry to any other than God? Tell me, if
ye speak the truth?

Yes! to Him will ye cry: and if He please He will deliver you from that ye
shall cry to Him to avert, and ye shall forget the partners ye joined with
Him.

Already have we sent apostles to nations that were before thee, and we laid
hold on them with troubles and with straits in order that they might humble
themselves:

Yet, when our trouble came upon them, they did not humble themselves; but
their hearts were hardened, and Satan pre-arranged for them11 their course of
conduct.

And when they had forgotten their warnings, we set open to them the gates of
all things, until, as they were rejoicing in our gifts, we suddenly laid hold
upon them, and lo! they were plunged into despair,

And the uttermost part of that impious people was cut off. All praise be to
God, the Lord of the Worlds!

SAY: What think ye? If God should take away your hearing and your sight and
set a seal upon your hearts, what god beside God would restore them to you?
See! how we vary our wondrous verses (signs)! yet they turn away from them!

SAY: What think ye? If the punishment of God come on you suddenly or
foreseen,12 shall any perish except the impious?

We send not our Sent Ones but as heralds of good news and warners; and whoso
shall believe and amend, on them shall come no fear, neither shall they be
sorrowful:

But whoso shall charge our signs with falsehood, on them shall fall a
punishment for their wicked doings.

SAY: I say not to you, "In my possession are the treasures of God;" neither
say I, "I know things secret;" neither do I say to you, "Verily, I am an
angel:" Only what is revealed to me do I follow. SAY: Shall the blind and the
seeing be esteemed alike? Will ye not then reflect?

And warn those who dread their being gathered to their Lord, that patron or
intercessor they shall have none but Him,-to the intent that they may fear
Him!

And thrust not thou away those who cry to their Lord at morn and even,
craving to behold his face. It is not for thee in anything to judge of their
motives, nor for them in anything to judge of thee. If thou thrust them away
thou wilt be of the doers of wrong.

Thus have we made proof of some of them by others, that they may say, "Are
these they among us to whom God hath been gracious?" Doth not God best know
the thankful?

And when they who believe in our signs come to thee, SAY: Peace be upon you!
Your Lord hath laid down for himself a law of mercy; so that if any one of
you commit a fault through ignorance, and afterwards turn and amend, He
surely will be Gracious, Merciful.

Thus have we distinctly set forth our signs, that the way of the wicked might
be made known.

SAY: Forbidden am I to worship those whom ye call on beside God. SAY: I will
not follow your wishes; for then should I have gone astray, and should not be
of the guided.

SAY: I act upon proofs from my Lord, but ye treat them as falsehoods. That
punishment which ye desire to be hastened is not in my power; judgment is
with God only: He will declare the truth; and He is the best settler of
disputes.

SAY: If what ye would hasten on, were in my power, the matter between me and
you had been decided: but God best knoweth the impious.

And with Him are the keys13 of the secret things; none knoweth them but He:
He knoweth whatever is on the land and in the sea; and no leaf falleth but He
knoweth it; neither is there a grain in the darknesses of the earth, nor a
thing green or sere, but it is noted in a distinct writing.14

It is He who taketh your souls at night,15 and knoweth what ye have merited
in the day: then he awaketh you therein, that the set life-term may be
fulfilled: then unto Him shall ye return; and then shall be declare to you
that which ye have wrought.

Supreme over his servants, He sendeth forth guardians who watch over you,
until, when death overtaketh any one of you, our messengers take his soul,
and fail not:

Then are they returned to God their Lord, the True. Is not judgment His?
Swiftest He, of those who take account!

SAY: Who rescueth you from the darkness of the land and of the sea, when
humbly and secretly ye cry to Him-"If thou rescue us from this, we will
surely be of the thankful?"

SAY: God rescueth you from them, and from every strait: yet afterwards ye
give Him companions!

SAY: It is He who hath power to send on you a punishment from above you, or
from beneath your feet, or to clothe you with discord,16 and to make some of
you to taste the violence of others. See how variously we handle the wondrous
verses, that haply they may become wise!

But thy people hath accused the Koran of falsehood, though it be the truth:
SAY: I am not in charge of you: To every prophecy is its set time, and bye-
and-bye ye shall know it!

And when thou seest those who busy themselves with cavilling at our signs,
withdraw from them till they busy themselves in some other subject: and if
Satan cause thee to forget this, sit not, after recollection, with the
ungodly people:17

Not that they who fear God are to pass any judgment upon them, but the object
of recollection is that they may continue to fear Him.

And quit those who make their religion a sport and a pastime, and whom this
present life hath deceived: warn them hereby that every soul will be
consigned to doom for its own works: patron or intercessor, beside God, shall
it have none: and could it compensate with fullest compensation, it would not
be accepted from it. They who for their deeds shall be consigned to doom-for
them are draughts of boiling water, and a grievous torment; for that they
believed not!

SAY: Shall we, beside God, call upon those who can neither help nor hurt us?
Shall we turn upon our heel after that God hath guided us? Like some
bewildered man whom the Satans have spell-bound in the desert, though his
companions call him to the true guidance, with, "Come to us!" SAY: Verily,
guidance from God, that is the true guidance; and we are commanded to
surrender ourselves to the Lord of the Worlds.

And observe ye the times of prayer, and fear ye God: for it is He to whom ye
shall be gathered.

And it is He who hath created the Heavens and the Earth, in truth, and when
He saith to a thing, "Be," it is.

His word is the truth: and His the kingdom, on the day when there shall be a
blast on the trumpet: He knoweth alike the unseen and the seen: and He is the
Wise, the Cognisant.

And remember when Abraham said to his father Azar,18 Takest thou images as
gods? Verily, I see that thou and thy people are in manifest error.

And thus did we shew Abraham the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth,19
that he might be stablished in knowledge.

And when the night overshadowed him, he beheld a star. "This," said he, "is
my Lord:" but when it set, he said, "I love not gods which set."

And when he beheld the moon uprising, "This," said he, "is my Lord:" but when
it set, he said, "Surely, if my Lord guide me not, I shall surely be of those
who go astray."

And when he beheld the sun uprise, he said, "This is my Lord; this is
greatest." But when it set, he said, "O my people! I share not with you the
guilt of joining gods with God;

I turn my face to him who hath created the Heavens and the Earth, following
the right religion:20 I am not one of those who add gods to God."

And his people disputed with him.-He said: "Dispute ye with me about God,
when He hath guided me? And I fear not the deities whom ye join with Him, for
only by the will of my Lord have they any power:21 My Lord embraceth all
things in His knowledge. Will ye not then consider?

And how should I fear what ye have joined with God, since ye fear not for
having joined with Him that for which He hath sent you down no warranty?
Which, therefore, of the two parties is more worthy of safety? Know ye that?

They who believe, and who clothe not their faith with error.22 theirs is
safety, and they are guided aright."

This is our reasoning with which we furnished Abraham against his people: We
uplift to grades of wisdom whom we will; Verily thy Lord is Wise, Knowing.

And we gave him Isaac and Jacob, and guided both aright; and we had before
guided Noah; and among the descendants of Abraham, David and Solomon, and Job
and Joseph, and Moses and Aaron: Thus do we recompense the righteous:

And Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elias: all were just persons:

And Ismael and Elisha and Jonas and Lot: all these have we favoured above
mankind:

And some of their fathers, and of their offspring, and of their brethren: and
we chose them, and guided them into the straight way.

This is God's guidance: He guideth by it such of his servants as he will: But
if they join others god with Him, vain assuredly shall be all their works.

These are they to whom we gave the Scripture and Wisdom and Prophecy: but if
these their posterity believe not therein, we will entrust these gifts to a
people who will not disbelieve therein.

These are they whom God hath guided: follow therefore their guidance. SAY: No
pay do I ask of you for this:23 Verily it is no other than the teaching for
all creatures.

No just estimate do they form of God when they say, "Nothing hath God sent
down to man." SAY: Who sent down the Book which Moses brought, a light and
guidance to man, which ye set down on paper, publishing part, but concealing
most: though ye have now been taught that which neither ye nor your fathers
knew? SAY: It is God: then leave them in their pastime of cavillings.24

And this Book which we have sent down is blessed, confirming that which was
before it; and in order that thou mightest warn the mother-city and those who
dwell round about it. They who believe in the next life will believe in It,
and will keep strictly to their Prayers.

But is any more wicked than he who deviseth a lie of God, or saith, "I have
had a revelation," when nothing was revealed to him?25 And who saith, "I can
bring down a book like that which God hath sent down"? But couldst thou see
when the ungodly are in the floods of death, and the angels reach forth their
hands, saying, "Yield up your souls:-this day shall ye be recompensed with a
humiliating punishment for your untrue sayings about God, and for proudly
rejecting his signs!"

"And now are ye come back to us, alone, as we created you at first, and ye
leave behind you the good things which we had given you, and we see not with
you your intercessors whom ye regarded as the companions of God among you.
There is a severance between you now, and those whom ye regarded as partners
with God have deserted you."

Verily God causeth the grain and the date stone to put forth: He bringeth
forth the living from the dead, and the dead from the living! This is God!
Why, then, are ye turned aside from Him?

He causeth the dawn to appear, and hath ordained the night for rest, and the
sun and the moon for computing time! The ordinance of the Mighty, the Wise!

And it is He who hath ordained the stars for you that ye may be guided
thereby in the darknesses of the land and of the sea! clear have we made our
signs to men of knowledge.

And it is He who hath produced you from one man, and hath provided for you an
abode and resting-place!26 Clear have we made our signs for men of insight.

And it is He who sendeth down rain from Heaven: and we bring forth by it the
buds of all the plants, and from them bring we forth the green foliage, and
the close growing grain, and palm trees with sheaths of clustering dates, and
gardens of grapes, and the olive and the pomegranate, like and unlike.27 Look
ye on their fruits when they fruit and ripen. Truly herein are signs unto
people who believe.

Yet have they assigned the Djinn to God as his associates, though He created
them; and in their ignorance have they falsely ascribed to him sons and
daughters. Glory be to Him! And high let Him be exalted above that which they
attribute to Him!

Sole maker of the Heavens and of the Earth! how, when He hath no consort,
should He have a son? He hath created everything, and He knoweth everything!

This is God your Lord. There is no God but He, the creator of all things:
therefore worship Him alone;-and He watcheth over all things.

No vision taketh in Him, but He taketh in all vision:28 and He is the
Subtile, the All-informed.

Now have proofs that may be seen, come to you from your Lord; whoso seeth
them, the advantage will be his own: and whoso is blind to them, his own will
be the loss: I am not made a keeper over you.

Thus variously do we apply our signs,29 that they may say, "Thou hast studied
deep:" and that to people of understanding we may make them clear.

Follow thou that which hath been revealed to thee by thy Lord: there is no
god but He! and withdraw from those who join other gods with Him.

Had God pleased, they had not joined other gods with Him: and we have not
made thee keeper over them, neither art thou a guardian over them.

Revile not those whom they call on beside God,30 lest they, in their
ignorance, despitefully revile Him. Thus have we planned out their actions
for every people; then shall they return to their Lord, and He will declare
to them what those actions have been.

With their most solemn oath have they sworn by God, that if a sign come unto
them they will certainly believe it; SAY: Signs are in the power of God
alone; and He teacheth you not thereby, only because when they were wrought,
ye did not believe.31

And we will turn their hearts and their eyes away from the truth, because
they did not believe therein at first, and we will leave them in their
transgressions, wandering in perplexity.

And though we had sent down the angels to them, and the dead had spoken to
them, and we had gathered all things about them in tribes, they had not
believed, unless God had willed it! but most of them do not know it.

Thus have we given an enemy to every prophet Satans among men and among
Djinn: tinsel discourses do they suggest the one to the other, in order to
deceive: and had thy Lord willed it, they would not have done it. Therefore,
leave them and their vain imaginings-

And let the hearts of those who believe not in the life to come incline
thereto, and let them find their content in this, and let them gain what they
are gaining.

What! shall I seek other judge than God, when it is He who hath sent down to
you the distinguishing Book? They to whom we have given the Book know that it
is sent down from thy Lord with truth. Be not thou then of those who doubt.

And the words of thy Lord are perfect in truth and in justice: none can
change his words: He is the Hearing, Knowing.

But if thou obey most men in this land, from the path of God will they
mislead thee: they follow but a conceit, and they are only liars.

Thy Lord! He best knoweth those who err from his path, and He knoweth the
rightly guided.

Eat32 of that over which the name of God hath been pronounced, if ye believe
in his signs.

And why eat ye not of that over which the name of God hath been pronounced,
since He hath made plain to you what He hath forbidden you, save as to that
which is forced upon you? But indeed many mislead others by their appetites,
through lack of knowledge. Verily, thy Lord! He best knoweth the
transgressors.

And abandon the semblance of wickedness, and wickedness itself.33 They,
verily, whose only acquirement is iniquity, shall be rewarded for what they
shall have gained.

Eat not therefore of that on which the name of God has not been named, for
that is assuredly a crime: the Satans will indeed suggest to their votaries
to wrangle with you; but if ye obey them, ye will indeed be of those who join
gods with God.

Shall the dead, whom we have quickened, and for whom we have ordained a light
whereby he may walk among men, be like him, whose likeness is in the
darkness, whence he will not come forth? Thus have the doings of the
unbelievers been prepared for them.

Even so have we placed in every city, ringleaders of its wicked ones, to
scheme therein: but only against themselves shall they scheme! and they know
it not.

And when a sign cometh to them they say, "We will not believe, till the like
of what was accorded to the apostles of God, be accorded to us." God best
knoweth where to place his mission. Disgrace with God, and a vehement
punishment shall come on the transgressors for their crafty plottings.

And whom God shall please to guide, that man's breast will He open to Islam;
but whom He shall please to mislead, strait and narrow will He make his
breast, as though he were mounting up into the very Heavens! Thus doth God
inflict dire punishment on those who believe not.

And this is the right way of thy Lord. Now have we detailed our signs unto
those who will consider.

For them is a dwelling of peace with their Lord! and in recompense for their
works, shall he be their protector.

On the day whereon God shall gather them all together . . .  "O race of
Djinn," will He say, "much did ye exact from mankind." And their votaries
from among men shall say, "O our Lord! we rendered one another mutual
services: but we have reached our set term, which thou hast set for us." He
will say, "Your abode the fire! therein abide ye for ever: unless as God
shall will." Verily, thy Lord is Wise, Knowing.

Even thus place we some of the wicked over others, as the meed of their
doings.

O race of Djinn and men! came not apostles to you from among yourselves,
rehearsing my signs to you, and warning you of the meeting of this your day?
They shall say, "We bear witness against ourselves." This world's life
deceived them; and they shall bear witness against themselves that they were
infidels:-

This,34 because thy Lord would not destroy the cities in their sin, while
their people were yet careless.

And for all, are grades of recompense as the result of their deeds; and of
what they do, thy Lord is not regardless.

And thy Lord is the Rich one, full of compassion! He can destroy you if He
please, and cause whom He will to succeed you, as he raised you up from the
offspring of other people:

Verily, that which is threatened you shall surely come to pass, neither shall
ye weaken its might.

SAY: O my people! Act as ye best can: I verily will act my part, and
hereafter shall ye know

Whose will be the recompense of the abode! Verily, the ungodly shall not
prosper.

Moreover, they set apart a portion of the fruits and cattle35 which he hath
produced, and say, "This for God"-so deem they-"And this for his companions,
whom we associate with Him." But that which is for these companions of
theirs, cometh not to God; yet that which is for God, cometh to the
companions! Ill do they judge.

Thus have the companion-gods induced many of these, who join them with God,
to slay their children, that they might ruin them, and throw the cloak of
confusion over their religion. But if God had pleased, they had not done
this. Therefore, leave them and their devices.

They also say, "These cattle and fruits are sacred: none may taste them but
whom we please:" so deem they-"And there are cattle, whose backs should be
exempt from labour." And there are cattle over which they do not pronounce
the name of God: inventing in all this a lie against Him. For their
inventions shall He reward them.

And they say, "That which is in the wombs of these cattle is allowed to our
males, and forbidden to our wives;" but if it prove abortive, both partake of
it. God shall reward them for their distinctions! Knowing, Wise is He.

Lost are they who, in their ignorance, have foolishly slain their children,
and have forbidden that which God hath given them for food, devising an
untruth against God! Now have they erred; and they were not rightly guided.

He it is who produceth gardens of the vine trellised and untrellised, and the
palm trees, and the corn of various food, and olives, and pomegranates, like
and unlike. Eat of their fruit when they bear fruit, and pay the due thereof
on the day of its ingathering: and be not prodigal, for God loveth not the
prodigal.

And there are cattle for burdens and for journeys. Eat of what God hath given
you for food; and follow not the steps of Satan, for he is your declared
enemy.

You have four sorts of cattle in pairs: of sheep a pair, and of goats a pair.
SAY: Hath He forbidden the two males or the two females; or that which the
wombs of the two females enclose? Tell me with knowledge, if ye speak the
truth:

And of camels a pair, and of oxen a pair. SAY: Hath He forbidden the two
males or the two females; or that which the wombs of the two females
enclose?36 Were ye witnesses when God enjoined you this? Who then is more
wicked than he who, in his ignorance, inventeth a lie against God, to mislead
men? God truly guideth not the wicked.

SAY: I find not in what hath been revealed to me aught forbidden to the eater
to eat, except it be that which dieth of itself, or blood poured forth, or
swine's flesh; for this is unclean or profane, being slain in the name of
other than God. But whoso shall be a forced partaker, if it be without
wilfulness, and not in transgression,-verily, thy Lord is Indulgent,
Merciful!

To the Jews did we forbid every beast having an entire hoof, and of both
bullocks and sheep we forbade them the fat, save what might be on their
backs, or their entrails, and the fat attached to the bone. With this have we
recompensed them, because of their transgression: and verily, we are indeed
equitable.

If they treat thee as an impostor, then SAY: Your Lord is of all-embracing
mercy: but his severity shall not be turned aside from the wicked.

They who add gods to God will say, "If God had pleased, neither we nor our
fathers had given him companions, nor should we have interdicted anything."
Thus did they who flourished before them charge with imposture, until they
had tasted our severity! SAY: Have ye any knowledge that ye can produce to
us? Verily, ye follow only a conceit: ye utter only lies!

SAY: Peremptory proof is God's! Had He pleased He had guided you all aright.

SAY: Bring hither your witnesses who can witness that God hath forbidden
these animals; but if they bear witness, witness not thou with them, nor
witness to the conceits of those who charge our signs with falsehood, and who
believe not in the life to come, and give equals to our Lord.

SAY: Come, I will rehearse what your Lord hath made binding on you-that ye
assign not aught to Him as partner; and that ye be good to your parents; and
that ye slay not your children, because of poverty: for them and for you will
we provide:37 and that ye come not near to pollutions, outward or inward:38
and that ye slay not anyone whom God hath forbidden you, unless for a just
cause. This hath he enjoined on you, to the intent that ye may understand.

And come not nigh to the substance of the orphan, but to improve it, until he
come of age: and use a full measure, and a just balance: We will not task a
soul beyond its ability. And when ye give judgment, observe justice, even
though it be the affair of a kinsman, and fulfil the covenant of God. This
hath God enjoined you for your monition-

And, "this is my right way." Follow it then; and follow not other paths lest
ye be scattered from His path. This hath he enjoined you, that ye may fear
Him.

Then39 gave we the Book to Moses-complete for him who should do right, and a
decision for all matters, and a guidance, and a mercy, that they might
believe in the meeting with their Lord.

Blessed, too, this Book which we have sent down. Wherefore follow it and fear
God, that ye may find mercy:

Lest ye should say, "The Scriptures were indeed sent down only unto two
peoples before us, but we were not able to go deep into their studies:"40

Or lest ye should say, "If a book had been sent down to us, we had surely
followed the guidance better than they." But now hath a clear exposition come
to you from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy. Who then is more wicked
than he who treateth the signs of God as lies, and turneth aside from them?
We will recompense those who turn aside from our signs with an evil
punishment, because they have turned aside.

What wait they for, but the coming of the angels to them, or the coming of
thy Lord Himself, or that some of the sings of the Lord should come to pass?
On the day when some of thy Lord's signs shall come to pass, its faith shall
not profit a soul which believed not before, nor wrought good works in virtue
of its faith. SAY: Wait ye. Verily, we will wait also.

As to those who split up their religion and become sects, have thou nothing
to do with them: their affair is with God only. Hereafter shall he tell them
what they have done.

He who shall present himself with good works shall receive a tenfold reward;
but he who shall present himself with evil works shall receive none other
than a like punishment: and they shall not be treated unjustly.

SAY: As for me, my Lord hath guided me into a straight path; a true religion,
the creed of Abraham, the sound in faith; for he was not of those who join
gods with God.

SAY: My prayers and my worship and my life and my death are unto God, Lord of
the Worlds. He hath no associate. This am I commanded, and I am the first of
the Muslims.

SAY: Shall I seek any other Lord than God, when He is Lord of all things? No
soul shall labour but for itself; and no burdened one shall bear another's
burden. At last ye shall return to your Lord, and he will declare that to you
about which you differ.

And it is He who hath made you the successors of others on the earth, and
hath raised some of you above others by various grades, that he may prove you
by his gifts. Verily thy Lord is swift to punish. But He is also Gracious,
Merciful!


_______________________

1 Lit. their affair would have been decided. In that case there would no
longer have been an opportunity for the warnings of the prophets and for
repentance, but the angels would at once have executed the divine judgments.

2 See Sura xli. 13, p. 193.

3 See Sura [xc.] xiii. 36.

4 This denunciation is repeated in eleven other passages of the Koran, and
coupled with the known reverence of the early Muslims for what they
considered as the word of God, must have greatly tended to secure the
revelations of the Prophet from being in any way tampered with and corrupted.

5 They are self-convicted of their own hypocrisy and of the hollowness of
their professions.

6 The Resurrection, etc.

7 Abu Jahl had said: "Muhammad speaks truth, and he never said a falsehood;
but, if the Banu Chosai, who enjoy already the offices of bearing the
standard, of providing the pilgrims with water, and of keeping the keys of
the Kaaba, should also obtain the Prophetship, what would remain for the
other Koreisch." Kashaf in 1.

8 See Sura lii. 38, p. 65. These passages may allude to the ladder set up in
a tower by Wacih ben Salamah, one of the ancient doorkeepers of the Caaba, by
which he professed to mount up to God and receive divine Oracles. Freyt.
Einl. p. 371.

9 A community. Comp. Prov. xxx. 25, 26. Animals as well as mankind are under
the control of God, are held within the limits of his decrees, are
accountable to him, and will stand before him in the judgment.

10 Of the Eternal decrees.

11 Or, embellished, made it fair-seeming.

12 Lit. openly, i.e. preceded by some sign.

13 The Rabbins speak of the three keys in the hand of God. Tr. Tanith, fol.
x.

14 On the preserved tablet, on which are written the decrees of God.

15 That is, during sleep. See Sura xxxix. 43, p. 258. Or, layeth to rest.
Mar. renders literally, defungi faciet vos, id est, obdormiscere. Thus also
Beidh. But see the use of the same word in the next verse.

16 Or, to perplex you (by dividing you into) sects.

17 Comp. Sura [cx.] 1x. 13.

18 Azar. This form is probably borrowed from Athar, as Terah is called by
Eusebius. See Maracci Prodr. iv. 90. Compare a similar narrative (Midr.
Rabbah on Gen. par. 17) in which Abraham is given over by his idolatrous
father Zarah to Nimrod, who says, "We will adore the Fire:" "Rather," said
Abraham, "the water which puts out fire." "The Water then"-"Rather the clouds
that bear the water." "The Clouds then"-"Rather the wind which scatters the
clouds." "The Wind then"-"Rather man who endures the wind." Whereupon Abraham
was thrown into the furnace. It is quite possible that in what follows,
Muhammad may have intended to imply that Abraham had renounced the Sabian
starworship of his fathers, and to vindicate him from the habit of consulting
the stars attributed to him by the Talmudists. Shabbath, fol. 156, col. 1.
"Abraham replied, I have consulted my Astrology." Comp. Rashi on Gen. xv. 5.
See Maim. Yad Hachaz. vii. 6.

19 Comp. Gen. xv. 5.

20 See Sura xxi. 52.

21 Lit. unless that my Lord shall will anything.

22 Or, confuse not their faith with wrong, injustice, i.e. idolatry.

23 Koran.

24 This verse and the following were probably added at Medina after the
Hejira; at least it is difficult to conceive that Muhammad would have
ventured thus to have written at Mecca.

25 This verse is said to have been revealed at Medina and to be aimed at the
false prophets Moseilama, Aswad and Amsi; also at Abdallah Ibn Saad,
Muhammad's secretary, who for corrupting the sacred text and apostacy, was
one of the ten proscribed at the taking of Mecca.

26 In the womb.

27 Of all sorts.

28 Lit. attaineth to.  Mr. Lane renders, "the eyes see not Him, but He seeth
the eyes."

29 The verses of the Koran.

30 Comp. Ex. xxii. 28.

31 Notwithstanding this disclaimer, the Muslim tradition, etc. speak of many
of their Prophet's miracles. See Maracci's Prodr. p. ii. p. 16, and 30 46.

32 Verses 118-121 seem misplaced, and should probably follow 154.

33 Lit. the outside of iniquity and its inside. Some understand these words
of open sins, and secret sins.

34 That is, God's method of dealing with the guilty was to send apostles
previous to the execution of his judgments.

35 It appears to have been the custom of the idolatrous Arabs to set apart
one portion of their fields for the Supreme God, and the other for the
inferior gods represented by their idols. If any of the fruit happened to
fall from the part consecrated to the idols into that consecrated to God,
they restored it, but if the reverse occurred, they gave it to the idols.
God, said they, is rich and can dispense with it. The secret, however, was
that the idols' portion was reserved for the priests, Beidhawi. Freytag
mentions the names of 73 idols worshipped by the Arab tribes, previous to
Islam (Einl. pp. 270 and 342 357) and generally with Allah, as Supreme God.

36 Comp. Sura [cxiv.] v. 102.

37 Comp. Sura xvii. 33, p. 167.

38 See verse 120 above.

39 This very abrupt transition to Jewish history seems to indicate that a
passage between this and the preceding verse is lost.

40 Lit. we were careless of their studies


SURA XIII.-THUNDER [XC.]

MECCA.-43 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM. RA.1 These, the signs of the Book! And that which hath been
sent down to thee from thy Lord is the very truth: But the greater part of
men will not believe.

It is God who hath reared the Heavens without pillars thou canst behold; then
mounted his throne, and imposed laws on the sun and moon: each travelleth to
its appointed goal. He ordereth all things. He maketh his signs clear, that
ye may have firm faith in a meeting with your Lord.

And He it is who hath outstretched the earth, and placed on it the firm
mountains, and rivers: and of every fruit He hath placed on it two kinds: He
causeth the night to enshroud the day. Verily in this are signs for those who
reflect.

And on the earth hard by each other are its various portions: gardens of
grapes and corn, and palm trees single or clustered. Though watered by the
same water, yet some make we more excellent as food than other: Verily in all
this are signs for those who understand.

If ever thou dost marvel, marvellous surely is their saying, "What! when we
have become dust, shall we be restored in a new creation?"

These are they who in their Lord believe not: these! the collars shall be on
their necks; and these shall be inmates of the fire, to abide therein for
aye.

To hasten evil rather than good will they challenge thee: but, before their
time have been like examples. Full, truly, of mercy is thy Lord unto men,
despite their sins; but verily, thy Lord is right vehement to punish.

And they who believe not say: "If a sign from his Lord be not sent down to
him . . . !" Thou art a warner only. And every people hath its guide.

God knoweth the burden of every female, and how much their wombs lessen and
enlarge: with Him everything is by measure:

Knower of the Hidden and the Manifest! the Great! the Most High!

Alike to Him is that person among you who concealeth his words, and he that
telleth them abroad: he who hideth him in the night, and he who cometh forth
in the day.

Each hath a succession of Angels before him and behind him, who watch over
him by God's behest. Verily, God will not change his gifts to men, till they
change what is in themselves: and when God willeth evil unto men, there is
none can turn it away, nor have they any protector beside Him.

He it is who maketh the lightning to shine unto you; for fear and hope: and
who bringeth up the laden clouds.

And the THUNDER uttereth his praise, and the Angels also, for awe of Him: and
he sendeth his bolts and smiteth with them whom he will2 while they are
wrangling about God! Mighty is he in prowess.

Prayer is His of right: but these deities to whom they pray beside Him give
them no answer, otherwise than as he is answered who stretcheth forth his
hands to the water that it may reach his mouth, when it cannot reach it! The
prayer of the Infidels only wandereth, and is lost.

And unto God doth all in the Heavens and on the Earth bow down in worship,
willingly or by constraint: their very shadows also morn and even!

SAY: Who is Lord of the Heavens and of the Earth? SAY: God. SAY: Why then
have ye taken beside Him protectors, who even for their own selves have no
power for help or harm? SAY: What! shall the blind and the seeing be held
equal? Shall the darkness and the light be held equal? Or have they given
associates to God who have created as He hath created, so that their creation
appear to them like His? SAY: God is the Creator of all things! He is the
One! the Conquering!

He sendeth down the rain from Heaven: then flow the torrents in their due
measure, and the flood beareth along a swelling foam. And from the metals
which are molten in the fire for the sake of ornaments or utensils, a like
scum ariseth. In this way doth God depict (set forth) truth and falsehood. As
to the foam, it is quickly gone: and as to what is useful to man, it
remaineth on the earth. Thus doth God set forth comparisons! To those who
respond to their Lord shall be an excellent reward; but those who respond not
to his call, had they all that the earth containeth twice over, they would
surely give it for their ransom. Evil their reckoning! and Hell their home!
And wretched the bed!

Shall he then who knoweth that what hath been sent down to thee from thy Lord
is the truth, act like him who is blind? Men of insight only will bear this
in mind,

Who fulfil their pledge to God, and break not their compact:

And who join together what God hath bidden to be joined, and who fear their
Lord, and dread an ill reckoning;

And who, from desire to see the face of their Lord, are constant amid trials,
and observe prayer and give alms, in secret and openly, out of what we have
bestowed upon them, and turn aside evil by good: for these is the recompense
of that abode,

Gardens of Eden-into which they shall enter together with the just of their
fathers, and their wives, and their descendants: and the angels shall go in
unto them at every portal:

"Peace be with you!" say they, "because ye have endured all things!" Charming
the recompense of their abode!

But those who, after having contracted it, break their covenant with God, and
cut asunder what God hath bidden to be united, and commit misdeeds on the
earth, these, a curse awaiteth them, and an ill abode!

God is open-handed with supplies to whom he will, or is sparing. They rejoice
in the life that now is, but this present life is but a passing good, in
respect of the life to come!3

And they who believe not say, "Unless a sign be sent down to him from his
Lord. . . ." SAY: God truly will mislead whom he will; and He will guide to
Himself him who turneth to Him,

Those who believe, and whose hearts rest securely on the thought of God.
What! Shall not men's hearts repose in the thought of God? They who believe
and do the things that be right-blessedness awaiteth them, and a goodly home.

Thus have we sent thee to a people whom other peoples have preceded, that
thou mightest rehearse to them our revelations to thee. Yet they believe not
on the God of Mercy.4 SAY: He is my Lord. There is no God but He. In Him do I
put my trust. To Him must I return.

If there were a Koran by which the mountains could be set in motion, or the
earth cleft, or the dead be made to speak  ! But all sovereignty is in the
hands of God. Do then believers doubt5 that had He pleased God would
certainly have guided all men aright?

Misfortune shall not cease to light on the unbelievers for what they have
done, or to take up its abode hard by their dwellings, until the threat of
God come to pass. Verily, God will not fail his plighted word.

Before thee indeed have apostles been mocked at; but though I bore long with
the unbelievers, at last I seized upon them;-and how severe was my
punishment!

Who is it then that is standing over every soul to mark its actions? Yet have
they set up associates with God. SAY: Name them. What! Would ye inform God of
that which He knoweth not on the Earth? Or are they not a mere empty name?
But prepared of old for the infidels was this fraud of theirs; and they are
turned aside from the path; and whom God causeth to err, no guide shall there
be for him!

Chastisement awaiteth them in this present life, and more grievous shall be
the chastisement of the next: and none shall screen them from God.

A picture of the Paradise which God hath promised to them that fear Him. The
rivers flow beneath its bowers: its food and its shades are perpetual. This
is the reward of those who fear God; but the reward of the unbelievers is the
Fire.

They to whom we have given the Book rejoice6 in what hath been sent down to
thee; yet some are banded together who deny a part of it. SAY: I am commanded
to worship God, and not to associate any creature with Him. On Him do I call,
and to Him shall I return.

Thus, then, as a code in the Arabic tongue have we sent down the Koran; and
truly, if after the knowledge that hath reached thee thou follow their
desires, thou shalt have no guardian nor protector against God.

Apostles truly have we already sent before thee, and wives and offspring have
we given them. Yet no apostle had come with miracles unless by the leave of
God. To each age its Book.

What He pleaseth will God abrogate or confirm: for with Him is the source of
revelation.7

Moreover, whether we cause thee to see the fulfilment of part of our menaces,
or whether we take thee hence, verily, thy work is preaching only, and ours
to take account.

See they not that we come into their land and cut short its borders?8 God
pronounceth a doom, and there is none to reverse his doom. And swift is He to
take account.

Those who lived before them made plots: but all plotting is controlled by
God: He knoweth the works of every one, and the infidels shall know whose
will be the recompense of the abode.

The infidels, moreover, will say; Thou art not sent of God. SAY: God is
witness enough betwixt me and you, and, whoever hath knowledge of the Book.


_______________________

1 See Sura 1xviii. p. 32.

2 This is said by the traditionists and commentators generally, to refer to
Amir and Arbad ben Kais, who in the year 9 or 10 conspired against Muhammad's
life, and were struck dead by lightning. See the authorities in N√∂ld. p. 120:
Weil, 256; Caussin, iii. 295. But this explanation may have been suggested by
the words of the text, which must, if the comment be correct, have been
revealed at Medina.

3 Thus, "one hour of bliss in the world to come is better than all life in
this world." Mischnah Aboth, iv. 17. Comp. Sura [cxiii.] ix. 38.

4 See Sura xvii. 109. This verse is said to have been occasioned by the
refusal of the Meccans at Hudaibiya to adopt the formula prescribed by
Muhammad-In the Name of the God of Mercy, the Merciful-declaring that they
knew not who the God of Mercy (Arrahman) was. This was in Hej. 6. See n. p.
173.

5 Lit. despair.

6 That is, the Jews, who at this period of Muhammad's prophetic function,
must have been highly gratified at the strong leaning towards, and respect
for, their Scriptures and Histories, which shews itself increasingly in the
later Meccan Suras.

7 Lit. Mother, or Prototype of the Book. Either God's knowledge or
Prescience, or the fabled preserved tablet, on which is written the original
of the Koran, and all God's decrees. The Jews have a tradition that the Law
existed before the Creation. Midr. Jalkut, 7.

8 That is, the progressive conquests of the Muslims trench more and more on
the territories of the idolatrous Arabians.


SURA II.-THE COW1 [XCI.]

MEDINA.-286 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM.2 No doubt is there about this Book: It is a guidance to the
God-fearing,

Who believe in the unseen,3 who observe prayer, and out of what we have
bestowed on them, expend for God;

And who believe in what hath been sent down to thee, and in what hath been
sent down before thee, and full faith have they in the life to come:

These are guided by their Lord; and with these it shall be well.

As to the infidels, alike is it to them whether thou warn them or warn them
not-they will not believe:

Their hearts and their ears hath God sealed up; and over their eyes is a
covering. For them, a severe chastisement!

And some4 there are who say, "We believe in God, and in the latter day:" Yet
are they not believers!

Fain would they deceive God and those who have believed; but they deceive
themselves only, and know it not.

Diseased are their hearts! And that disease hath God increased creased to
them. Their's a sore chastisement, for that they treated their prophet as a
liar!

And when it is said to them, "Cause not disorders in the earth:" they say,
"Nay, rather do we set them right."

Is it not that they are themselves the authors of disorder? But they perceive
it not!

And when it is said to them, "Believe as other men have believed;" they say,
"Shall we believe as the fools have believed?" Is it not that they are
themselves the fools? But they know it not!

And when they meet the faithful they say, "We believe;" but when they are
apart with their Satans5 they say, "Verily we hold with you, and at them we
only mock."

God shall mock at them, and keep them long in their rebellion, wandering in
perplexity.

These are they who have purchased error at the price of guidance: but their
traffic hath not been gainful, neither are they guided at all.

They are like one6 who kindleth a fire, and when it hath thrown its light on
all around him. . . .  God taketh away their light and leaveth them in
darkness-they cannot see!-

Deaf, dumb, blind: therefore they shall not retrace their steps from error!

Or like those who, when there cometh a storm-cloud out of the Heaven, big
with darkness thunder and lightning, thrust their fingers into their ears
because of the thunder-clap, for fear of death! God is round about the
infidels.

The lightning almost snatcheth away their eyes! So oft as it gleameth on them
they walk on in it, but when darkness closeth upon them, they stop! And if
God pleased, of their ears and of their eyes would he surely deprive them:
verily God is Almighty! O men of Mecca7 adore your Lord, who hath created you
and those who were before you: haply ye will fear Him

Who hath made the earth a bed for you, and the heaven a covering, and hath
caused water to come down from heaven, and by it hath brought forth fruits
for your sustenance! Do not then wittingly give peers to God.

And if ye be in doubt as to that which we have sent down to our servant, then
produce a Sura like it, and summon your witnesses, beside God, if ye are men
of truth:

But if ye do it not, and never shall ye do it, then fear the fire prepared
for the infidels, whose fuel is men and stones:8

But announce to those who believe and do the things that are right, that for
them are gardens 'neath which the rivers flow! So oft as they are fed
therefrom with fruit for sustenance, they shall say, "This same was our
sustenance of old:" And they shall have its like given to them.9 Therein
shall they have wives of perfect purity, and therein shall they abide for
ever.

Verily God is not ashamed to set forth as well the instance of a gnat10 as of
any nobler object: for as to those who have believed, they know it to be the
truth from their Lord; but as to the unbelievers, they will say, "What
meaneth God by this comparison?" Many will He mislead by such parables and
many guide: but none will He mislead thereby except the wicked,

Who, after its establishment, violate the covenant of God,11 and cut in
sunder what God hath bidden to be joined, and act disorderly on the Earth.
These are they who shall suffer loss!

How can ye withhold faith from God? Ye were dead and He gave you life; next
He will cause you to die; next He will restore you to life: next shall ye
return to Him!

He it is who created for you all that is on Earth, then proceeded to the
Heaven, and into seven12 Heavens did He fashion it: and He knoweth all
things.

When thy Lord said to the angels, "Verily, I am about to place one in my
stead on earth,"13 they said, "Wilt thou place there one who will do ill
therein and shed blood, when we celebrate thy praise and extol thy holiness?"
God said, "Verily, I know what ye know not."

And he taught Adam the names of all things, and then set them before the
angels,14 and said, "Tell me the names of these, if ye are endued with
wisdom."15

They said, "Praise be to Thee! We have no knowledge but what Thou hast given
us to know. Thou! Thou art the Knowing, the Wise."

He said, "O Adam, inform them of their names." And when he had informed them
of their names, He said, "Did I not say to you that I know the hidden things
of the Heavens and of the Earth, and that I know what ye bring to light, and
what ye hide?"

And when we said to the angels, "Bow down and worship Adam," then worshipped
they all, save Eblis.16 He refused and swelled with pride, and became one of
the unbelievers.

And we said, "O Adam! dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden, and eat ye
plentifully therefrom wherever ye list; but to this tree come not nigh, lest
ye become of the transgressors."

But Satan17 made them slip from it, and caused their banishment from the
place in which they were. And we said, "Get ye down, the one of you an enemy
to the other: and there shall be for you in the earth a dwelling-place, and a
provision for a time."

And words of prayer learned Adam from his Lord: and God turned to him; for He
loveth to turn, the Merciful.

We said, "Get ye down from it, all together: and if

Guidance shall come to you from me, whoso shall follow my guidance, on them
shall come no fear, neither shall they be grieved:

But they who shall not believe, and treat our signs as false-hoods, these
shall be inmates of the fire; in it shall they remain for ever."

O children of Israel! remember my favour wherewith I shewed favour upon you,
and be true to your covenant with me; I will be true to my covenant with you;
me therefore, revere me! and believe in what I have sent down confirming your
Scriptures, and be not the first to disbelieve it, neither for a mean price
barter my signs: me therefore, fear ye me!

And clothe not the truth with falsehood, and hide not the truth when ye know
it:18

And observe prayer and pay the legal impost, and bow down with those who bow.

Will ye enjoin what is right upon others, and forget yourselves? Yet ye read
the Book: will ye not understand?

And seek help with patience and prayer: a hard duty indeed is this, but not
to the humble,

Who bear in mind that they shall meet their Lord, and that unto Him shall
they return.

O children of Israel! remember my favour wherewith I shewed favour upon you;
for verily to you above all human beings have I been bounteous.

And fear ye the day when soul shall not satisfy for soul at all, nor shall
any intercession be accepted from them, nor shall any ransom be taken,
neither shall they be helped.

And remember when we rescued you from the people of Pharaoh, who had laid on
you a cruel chastisement. They slew your male children, and let only your
females live: and in this was a great trial from your Lord:

And when we parted the sea for you, and saved you, and drowned the people of
Pharaoh, while ye were looking on:

And when we were in treaty with Moses forty nights: then during his absence
took ye the calf and acted wickedly:

Yet after this we forgave you, that ye might be grateful:

And when we gave Moses the Book and the Illumination19 in order to your
guidance:

And remember when Moses said to his people, "O my people! verily ye - have
sinned to your own hurt, by your taking the calf to worship it: Be turned
then to your creator, and slay the guilty among you;20 this will be best for
you with your creator:" Then turned He unto you, for He is the one who
turneth, the Merciful:

And when ye said, "O Moses! we will not believe thee until we see God
plainly;" the thunderbolt fell upon you while ye were looking on:

Then we raised you to life after ye had been dead,21 that haply ye might give
thanks:

And we caused the clouds to overshadow you, and we sent down manna and quails
upon you;-"Eat of the good things we have give you for sustenance;"-and they
injured not us but they injured themselves.22

And when we said, "Enter this city,23 and eat therefrom plentifully, at your
will, and enter the gate with prostrations, and say, 'Forgiveness;' and we
will pardon you your sins, and give an increase to the doers of good:"-

But the evil-doers changed that word into another than that spoken to them,24
and we sent down upon those evil-doers wrath from heaven, for that they had
done amiss:

And when Moses asked drink for his people, we said, "Strike the rock with thy
rod;" and from it there gushed twelve fountains: each tribe25 knew their
drinking-place:-"Eat and drink," said we, "of what God hath supplied, and do
no wrong on the earth by licentious deeds:"

And when ye said, "O Moses! we will not put up with one sort of food: pray,
therefore, thy Lord for us, that He would bring forth for us of that which
the earth groweth, its herbs and its cucumbers and its garlic and its lentils
and its onions:" He said, "What! will ye exchange that which is worse for
what is better? Get ye down into Egypt;-for ye shall have what ye have
asked:" Vileness and poverty were stamped upon them, and they returned with
wrath from God: This, for that they disbelieved the signs of God, and slew
the Prophets26 unjustly: this, for that they rebelled and transgressed!

Verily, they who believe (Muslims), and they who follow the Jewish religion,
and the Christians, and the Sabeites27-whoever of these believeth in God and
the last day, and doeth that which is right, shall have their reward with
their Lord: fear shall not come upon them, neither shall they be grieved.

Call to mind also when we entered into a covenant with you, and lifted up the
mountain28 over you:-"Take hold," said we, "on what we have revealed to you,
with resolution, and remember what is therein, that ye may fear:"

But after this ye turned back, and but for God's grace and mercy toward you,
ye had surely been of the lost! Ye know too those of you who transgressed on
the Sabbath, and to whom we said, "Be changed into scouted apes:"29

And we made them a warning to those of their day, and to those who came after
them, and a caution to the God-fearing:

And when Moses said to his people, "Verily, God bids you sacrifice a COW;"30
they said, "Makest thou a jest of us?" He said, "God keep me from being one
of the foolish." They said, "Call on thy Lord for us that He would make plain
to us what she is." He said, "God saith, 'She is a cow neither old nor young,
but of the middle age between the two:' do therefore what ye are bidden."

They said, "Call on your Lord for us, that he would make plain to us what is
her colour." He said, "God saith, 'She is a fawn-coloured cow; her colour is
very bright; she rejoiceth the beholders.' "

They said, "Call on they Lord for us that He would make plain to us what cow
it is-for to us are cows alike,-and verily, if God please, we shall be guided
rightly:"

He said, "God saith, 'She is a cow not worn by ploughing the earth or
watering the field, sound, no blemish in her.' " They said, "Now hast thou
brought the truth:" Then they sacrificed her; Yet nearly had they done it
not:

And when ye slew a man, and strove among yourselves about him, God brought to
light what he had hidden:

For we said, "Strike the corpse with part of her." So God giveth life to the
dead, and sheweth you his signs, that haply ye may understand.

Then after that your hearts became hard like rocks, or harder still: for
verily, from rocks have rivers gushed; others, verily, have been cleft, and
water hath issued from them; and others, verily, have sunk down through fear
of God: And God is not regardless of your actions.

Desire ye then that for your sakes31 the Jews should believe? Yet a part of
them heard the word of God, and then, after they had understood it, perverted
it, and knew that they did so.

And when they fall in with the faithful, they say, "We believe;" but when
they are apart32 one with another, they say, "Will ye acquaint them with what
God hath revealed to you, that they may dispute with you about it in the
presence of your Lord?" Understand ye their aim?

Know they not that God knoweth what they hide, as well as what they bring to
light?

But there are illiterates among them who are unacquainted with the Book,33
but with lies only, and have but vague fancies. Woe to those who with their
own hands transcribe the Book corruptly, and then say, "This is from God,"
that they may sell it for some mean price! Woe then to them for that which
their hands have written! and, Woe to them for the gains which they have
made!

And they say, "Hell fire shall not touch us, but for a few days:"34 SAY: Have
ye received such a promise from God? for God will not revoke his promise: or,
Speak ye of God that which ye know not?

But they whose only gains are evil works, and who are environed by their
sins,-they shall be inmates of the fire, therein to abide for ever:

But they who have believed and done the things that be right, they shall be
the inmates of Paradise,-therein to abide for ever.

And when we entered into covenant with the children of Israel, we said,
"Worship none but God, and be good to your parents and kindred, and to
orphans, and to the poor, and speak with men what is right, and observe
prayer, and pay the stated alms." Then turned ye away, except a few of you,
and withdrew afar off.

And when we made a covenant with you that ye should not shed your own
blood,35 nor expel one another from your abodes, then ye ratified it and
yourselves were witnesses.

Then were ye the very persons who slew one another; and ye drove out a part
of your own people from their abodes; ye lent help against them with wrong
and hatred; but if they come captives to you, ye redeem them!-Yet it was
forbidden you to drive them out.36 Believe ye then part of the Book, and deny
part? But what shall be the meed of him among you who doth this, but shame in
this life? And on the day of the Resurrection they shall be sent to the most
cruel of torments, for God is not regardless of what ye do.

These are they who purchase this present life at the price of that which is
to come: their torment shall not be lightened, neither shall they be helped.

Moreover, to Moses gave we "the Book," and we raised up apostles after him;
and to Jesus, son of Mary, gave we clear proofs of his mission, and
strengthened him by the Holy Spirit.37 So oft then as an apostle cometh to
you with that which your souls desire not, swell ye with pride, and treat
some as impostors, and slay others?

And they say, "Uncircumcised are our hearts." Nay! God hath cursed them in
their infidelity: few are they who believe!

And when a Book had come to them from God, confirming that which they had
received already-although they had before prayed for victory over those who
believed not-yet when that Koran come to them, of which they had knowledge,
they did not recognise it. The curse of God on the infidels!

For a vile price have they sold themselves, by not believing what God hath
sent down, envious of God's sending down his grace on such of his servants as
he pleaseth:38 and they have brought on themselves wrath upon wrath. And for
the unbelievers is a disgraceful chastisement.

And when it is said to them, "Believe in what God hath sent down," they say,
"In that which hath been sent down to us we believe:" but what hath since
been sent down they disbelieve, although it be the truth confirmatory of
their own Scriptures. SAY: Why then have ye of old slain God's prophets,39 if
ye are indeed believers?

Moreover, Moses came unto you with proofs of his mission. Then in his absence
ye took the calf for your God, and did wickedly.

And when we accepted your covenant, and uplifted40 the mountain over you, we
said, "Take firm hold on what we have given you, and hearken." They said, "We
have hearkened and have rebelled:" then were they made to drink down the calf
into their hearts for their ingratitude. SAY: A bad thing hath your faith
commanded you, if ye be indeed believers.

SAY: If the future dwelling place with God be specially for you, but not for
the rest of mankind, then wish for death, if ye are sincere:

But never can they wish for it, because of that which their own hands have
sent on before them!41 And God knoweth the offenders.

And thou wilt surely find them of all men most covetous of life, beyond even
the polytheists. To be kept alive a thousand years might one of them desire:
but that he may be preserved alive, shall no one reprieve himself from the
punishment! And God seeth what they do.

SAY: Whoso is the enemy of Gabriel-For he it is who by God's leave hath
caused the Koran to descend on thy heart, the confirmation of previous
revelations, and guidance, and good tidings to the faithful-

Whoso is an enemy to God or his angels, or to Gabriel, or to Michael, shall
have God as his enemy: for verily God is an enemy to the Infidels.

Moreover, clear signs have we sent down to thee, and none will disbelieve
them but the perverse.

Oft as they have formed an engagement with thee, will some of them set it
aside? But most of them believe not.

And when there came to them an apostle from God, affirming the previous
revelations made to them, some of those to whom the Scriptures were given,
threw the Book of God behind their backs as if they knew it not:

And they followed what the Satans read42 in the reign of Solomon: not that
Solomon was unbelieving, but the Satans were unbelieving. Sorcery did they
teach to men, and what had been revealed to the two angels, Harut and Marut,
at Babel. Yet no man did these two teach until they had said, "We are only a
temptation. Be not then an unbeliever." From these two did men learn how to
cause division between man and wife: but unless by leave of God, no man did
they harm thereby. They learned, indeed, what would harm and not profit them;
and yet they knew that he who bought that art should have no part in the life
to come! And vile the price for which they have sold themselves,-if they had
but known it!

But had they believed and feared God, better surely would have been the
reward from God,-if they had but known it!

O ye who believe! say not to our apostle, "Raina"43 (Look at us); but say,
"Ondhorna" (Regard us). And attend to this; for, the Infidels shall suffer a
grievous chastisement.

The unbelievers among the people of the Book, and among the idolaters, desire
not that any good should be sent down to you from your Lord: but God will
shew His special mercy to whom He will, for He is of great bounty.

Whatever verses we cancel,44 or cause thee to forget, we bring a better or
its like. Knowest thou not that God hath power over all things?

Knowest thou not that the dominion of the Heavens and of the Earth is God's?
and that ye have neither patron nor helper, save God?

Would ye ask of your apostle what of old was asked of Moses? But he who
exchangeth faith for unbelief,45 hath already erred from the even way.

Many of the people of the Book desire to bring you back to unbelief after ye
have believed, out of selfish envy, even after the truth hath been clearly
shewn them. But forgive them, and shun them till God shall come in with His
working. Truly God hath power over all things.

And observe prayer and pay the legal impost:46 and whatever good thing ye
have sent on before for your soul's sake, ye shall find it with God. Verily
God seeth what ye do.

And they say, "None but Jews or Christians shall enter Paradise:" This is
their wish. SAY: Give your proofs if ye speak the truth.

But they who set their face with resignation Godward, and do what is right,-
their reward is with their Lord; no fear shall come on them, neither shall
they be grieved.

Moreover, the Jews say, "The Christians lean on nought:" "On nought lean the
Jews," say the Christians: Yet both are readers of the Book. So with like
words say they who have no knowledge.47 But on the resurrection day, God
shall judge between them as to that in which they differ.

And who committeth a greater wrong than he who hindereth God's name from
being remembered in his temples, and who hasteth to ruin them?48 Such men
cannot enter them but with fear. Their's is shame in this world, and a severe
torment in the next.

The East and the West is God's: therefore, whichever way ye turn, there is
the face of God:49 Truly God is immense and knoweth all.

And they say, "God hath a son:" No! Praise be to Him!  But-His, whatever is
in the Heavens and the Earth! All obeyeth Him,

Sole maker of the Heavens and of the Earth! And when He decreeth a thing, He
only saith to it, "Be," and it is.

And they who have no knowledge say, "Unless God speak to us, or thou shew us
a sign . . . !"  So, with like words, said those who were before them: their
hearts are alike: Clear signs have we already shewn for those who have firm
faith:

Verily, with the Truth have we sent thee, a bearer of good tidings and a
warner: and of the people of Hell thou shalt not be questioned.

But until thou follow their religion, neither Jews nor Christians will be
satisfied with thee. SAY: Verily, guidance of God,-that is the guidance! And
if, after "the Knowledge" which hath reached thee, thou follow their desires,
thou shalt find neither helper nor protector against God.

They to whom we have given the Book, and who read it as it ought to be read,-
these believe therein: but whoso believeth not therein, shall meet with
perdition.

O children of Israel! remember my favour wherewith I have favoured you, and
that high above all mankind have I raised you:

And dread the day when not in aught shall soul satisfy for soul, nor shall
any ransom be taken from it, nor shall any intercession avail, and they shall
not be helped.

When his Lord made trial of Abraham by commands which he fulfilled, He said,
"I am about to make thee an Im√¢m to mankind:" he said, "Of my offspring
also:" "My covenant," said God, "embraceth not the evil doers."

And remember when we appointed the Holy House50 as man's resort and safe
retreat, and said, "Take ye the station of Abraham for a place of prayer:"
And we commanded Abraham and Ismael, "Purify my house for those who shall go
in procession round it, and those who shall abide there for devotion, and
those who shall bow down and prostrate themselves."

And when Abraham said, "Lord! make this secure land, and supply its people
with fruits, such of them as believe in God and in the last day:" He said,
"And whoso believeth not, for a little while will I bestow good things on
him; then will I drive him to the torment of the Fire!" An ill passage!

And when Abraham, with Ismael, raised the foundations51 of the House, they
said, "O our Lord! accept it from us; for thou art the Hearer, the Knower.

O our Lord! make us also Muslims, and our posterity a Muslim people; and
teach us our holy rites, and be turned towards us, for thou art He who
turneth, the Merciful.

O our Lord! raise up among them an apostle52 who may rehearse thy signs unto
them, and teach them 'the Book,' and Wisdom, and purify them: for thou art
the Mighty, the Wise."

And who but he that hath debased his soul to folly will mislike the faith of
Abraham, when we have chosen him in this world, and in the world to come he
shall be of the Just?

When his Lord said to him, "Resign thyself to me," he said, "I resign myself
to the Lord of the Worlds."

And this to his children did Abraham bequeath, and Jacob also, saying, "O my
children! truly God hath chosen a religion for you; so die not unless ye be
also Muslims."

Were ye present when Jacob was at the point of death?53 when he said to his
sons, "Whom will ye worship when I am gone?" They said, "We will worship thy
God and the God of thy fathers Abraham and Ismael and Isaac, one God, and to
Him are we surrendered (Muslims)."

That people have now passed away; they have the reward of their deeds, and ye
shall have the meed of yours: but of their doings ye shall not be questioned.

They say, moreover, "Become Jews or Christians that ye may have the true
guidance." SAY: Nay! the religion of Abraham, the sound in faith,54 and not
one of those who join gods with God!

Say ye: "We believe in God, and that which hath been sent down to us, and
that which hath been sent down to Abraham and Ismael and Isaac and Jacob and
the tribes: and that which hath been given to Moses and to Jesus, and that
which was given to the prophets from their Lord. No difference do we make
between any of them: and to God are we resigned (Muslims)."

If therefore they believe even as ye believe, then have they true guidance;
but if they turn back, then do they cut themselves off from you: and God will
suffice to protect thee against them, for He is the Hearer, the Knower.55

Islam is the Baptism of God,56 and who is better to baptise than God? And Him
do we serve.

SAY: Will ye dispute with us about God? when He is our Lord and your Lord! We
have our works and ye have your works; and we are sincerely His.

Will ye say, "Verily Abraham, and Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
tribes, were Jews or Christians?" SAY: Who knoweth best, ye, or God? And who
is more in fault than he who concealeth the witness which he hath from God?
But God is not regardless of what ye do.

That people have now passed away: they have the reward of their deeds, and
for you is the meed of yours; but of their doings ye shall not be questioned.

The foolish ones will say, "What hath turned them from the kebla which they
used?" SAY: The East and the West are God's. He guideth whom he will into the
right path.

Thus have we made you a central people,57 that ye may be witnesses in regard
to mankind, and that the apostle may be a witness in regard to you.

We appointed the kebla which thou formerly hadst, only that we might know him
who followeth the apostle, from him who turneth on his heels: The change is a
difficulty, but not to those whom God hath guided. But God will not let your
faith58 be fruitless; for unto man is God Merciful, Gracious.

We have seen thee turning thy face towards every part of Heaven; but we will
have thee turn to a kebla which shall please thee. Turn then thy face towards
the sacred Mosque,59 and wherever ye be, turn your faces towards that part.
They, verily, to whom "the Book" hath been given, know this to be the truth
from their Lord: and God is not regardless of what ye do.

Even though thou shouldest bring every kind of sign to those who have
received the Scriptures, yet thy kebla they will not adopt; nor shalt thou
adopt their kebla; nor will one part of them adopt the kebla of the other.
And if, after the knowledge which hath come to thee, thou follow their
wishes, verily then wilt thou become of the unrighteous.

They to whom we have given the Scriptures know him-the apostle-even as they
know their own children: but truly a part of them do conceal the truth,
though acquainted with it.60

The truth is from thy Lord. Be not then of those who doubt.

All have a quarter of the Heavens to which they turn them; but wherever ye
be, hasten emulously after good: God will one day bring you all together;
verily, God is all-powerful.

And from whatever place thou comest forth, turn thy face toward the sacred
Mosque; for this is the truth from thy Lord; and God is not inattentive to
your doings.

And from whatever place thou comest forth, turn thy face toward the sacred
Mosque; and wherever ye be, to that part turn your faces, lest men have cause
of dispute against you: but as for the impious among them, fear them not; but
fear me, that I may perfect my favours on you, and that ye may be guided
aright.

And we sent to you an apostle from among yourselves to rehearse our signs
unto you, and to purify you, and to instruct you in "the Book," and in the
wisdom, and to teach you that which ye knew not:

Therefore remember me: I will remember you; and give me thanks and be not
ungrateful.

O ye who believe! seek help with patience and with prayer, for God is with
the patient.

And say not of those who are slain on God's path61 that they are Dead; nay,
they are Living! But ye understand not.

With somewhat of fear and hunger, and loss of wealth, and lives, and fruits,
will we surely prove you: but bear good tidings to the patient,

Who when a mischance chanceth them, say, "Verily we are God's, and to Him
shall we return:"62

On them shall be blessings from their Lord, and mercy: and these!-they are
the rightly guided.

Verily, Safa and Marwah63 are among the monuments of God: whoever then maketh
a pilgrimage to the temple, or visiteth it, shall not be to blame if he go
round about them both. And as for him who of his own accord doeth what is
good-God is Grateful, Knowing.

They who conceal aught that we have sent down, either of clear proof or of
guidance, after what we have so clearly shewn to men in the Book,64 God shall
curse them, and they who curse shall curse them.

But as for those who turn to me, and amend and make known the truth, even
unto them will I turn me, for I am He who Turneth, the Merciful.

Verily, they who are infidels and die infidels,-these! upon them shall be the
malison of God and of angels and of all men:

Under it shall they remain for ever: their torment shall not be lightened,
and God will not even look upon them!

Your God is one God:65 there is no God but He, the Compassionate, the
Merciful.

Assuredly in the creation of the Heavens and of the Earth; and in the
alternation of night and day; and in the ships which pass through the sea
with what is useful to man; and in the rain which God sendeth down from
Heaven, giving life by it to the earth after its death, and by scattering
over it all kinds of cattle; and in the change of the winds, and in the
clouds that are made to do service between the Heaven and the Earth;-are
signs for those who understand.

Yet there are men who take to them idols along with God, and love them with
the love of God: But stronger in the faithful is the love of God. Oh! the
impious will see, when they see their chastisement, that all power is God's,
and that God is severe in chastising.

When those who have had followers66 shall declare themselves clear from their
followers after that they have seen the chastisement, and when the ties
between them shall be cut asunder;

The followers shall say, "Could we but return to life we would keep ourselves
clear from them, as they have declared themselves clear of us." So will God
shew them their works! Sighing is upon them! but, forth from the fire they
come not.

Oh men! eat of that which is lawful and good on the earth, but follow not the
steps of Satan, for he is your avowed enemy:

He only enjoineth you evil and wickedness, and that ye should aver of God
that which ye know not.

And when it is said to them, "Follow ye that which God hath sent down;" they
say, "Nay, we follow the usages which we found with our fathers." What!
though their fathers were utterly ignorant and devoid of guidance?

The infidels resemble him who shouteth aloud to one who heareth no more than
a call and cry! Deaf, Dumb, blind: therefore they have no understanding.

O ye who believe! eat of the good things with which we have supplied you, and
give God thanks if ye are His worshippers.

But that which dieth of itself, and blood, and swine's flesh, and that over
which any other name than that of God hath been invoked, is forbidden you.
But he who shall partake of them by constraint, without lust or wilfulness,
no sin shall be upon him. Verily God is Indulgent, Merciful.

They truly who hide the Scriptures which God hath sent down, and barter them
for a mean price-these shall swallow into their bellies nought but fire. God
will not speak to them, or assoil them, on the day of the Resurrection: and
theirs shall be a grievous torment.

These are they who have bartered guidance for error, and pardon for torment;
But how great their endurance in fire!67

This shall be their doom, because God had sent down "the Book" with the very
truth. And verily they who dispute about that Book are in a far-gone
severance from it.

There is no piety in turning your faces toward the east or the west, but he
is pious who believeth in God, and the last day, and the angles, and the
Scriptures, and the prophets; who for the love of God disburseth his wealth
to his kindred, and to the orphans, and the needy, and the wayfarer, and
those who ask, and for ransoming; who observeth prayer, and payeth the legal
alms, and who is of those who are faithful to their engagements when they
have engaged in them, and patient under ills and hardships, and in time of
trouble: these are they who are just, and these are they who fear the Lord.

O believers! retaliation for bloodshedding is prescribed to you: the free man
for the free, and the slave for the slave, and the woman for the woman: but
he to whom his brother shall make any remission,68 is to be dealt with
equitably; and to him should he pay a fine with liberality.

This is a relaxation69 from your Lord and a mercy. For him who after his
shall transgress,70 a sore punishment!

But in this law of retaliation is your security for life, O men of
understanding! to the intent that ye may fear God.

It is prescribed to you, when any one of you is at the point of death, if he
leave goods, that he bequeath equitably to his parents and kindred. This is
binding on those who fear God. But as for him who after he hath heard the
bequest shall change it, surely the wrong of this shall be on those who
change it: verily, God Heareth, Knoweth.

But he who feareth from the testator any mistake or wrong, and shall make a
settlement between the parties-that shall be no wrong in him: verily, God is
Lenient, Merciful.

O believers! a Fast is prescribed to you as it was prescribed to those before
you, that ye may fear God,

For certain days. But he among you who shall be sick, or on a journey, shall
fast that same number of other days: and as for those who are able to keep it
and yet break it, the expiation of this shall be the maintenance of a poor
man. And he who of his own accord performeth a good work, shall derive good
from it: and good shall it be for you to fast if ye knew it.

As to the month Ramadhan in which the Koran was sent down to be man's
guidance, and an explanation of that guidance, and of that illumination,71 as
soon as any one of you observeth the moon, let him set about the fast; but he
who is sick, or upon a journey, shall fast a like number of other days. God
wisheth you ease, but wisheth not your discomfort, and that you fulfil the
number of days, and that you glorify God for his guidance, and that you be
thankful.

And when my servants ask thee concerning me, then will I be nigh unto them. I
will answer the cry of him that crieth, when he crieth unto me: but let them
hearken unto me, and believe in me, that they may proceed aright.

You are allowed on the night of the fast to approach your wives: they are
your garment and ye are their garment.72 God knoweth that ye defraud
yourselves therein, so He turneth unto you and forgiveth you! Now, therefore,
go in unto them with full desire for that which God hath ordained for you;
and eat and drink until ye can discern a white thread from a black thread73
by the daybreak: then fast strictly till night, and go not in unto them, but
rather pass the time in the Mosques. These are the bounds set up by God:
therefore come not near them. Thus God maketh his signs clear to men that
they may fear Him.74

Consume not your wealth among yourselves in vain things, nor present it to
judges that ye may consume a part of other men's wealth unjustly, while ye
know the sin which ye commit.

They will ask thee of the new moons. SAY: They are periods fixed for man's
service and for the Pilgrimage. There is no piety in entering your houses at
the back,75 but piety consists in the fear of God. Enter your houses then by
their doors; and fear God that it may be well with you.

And fight for the cause of God against those who fight against you: but
commit not the injustice of attacking them first: God loveth not such
injustice:

And kill them wherever ye shall find them, and eject them from whatever place
they have ejected you; for civil discord76 is worse than carnage: yet attack
them not at the sacred Mosque, unless they attack you therein; but if they
attack you, slay them. Such the reward of the infidels.

But if they desist, then verily God is Gracious, Merciful.

Fight therefore against them until there be no more civil discord, and the
only worship be that of God: but if they desist, then let there be no
hostility, save against the wicked.

The sacred month and the sacred precincts are under the safeguard of
reprisals:77 whoever offereth violence to you, offer ye the like violence to
him, and fear God, and know that God is with those who fear Him.

Give freely for the cause of God, and throw not yourselves with your own
hands into ruin;78 and do good, for God loveth those who do good.

Accomplish the Pilgrimage and the Visitation79 of the holy places in honour
of God: and if ye be hemmed in by foes, send whatever offering shall be the
easiest: and shave not your heads until the offering reach the place of
sacrifice. But whoever among you is sick, or hath an ailment of the head,
must satisfy by fasting, or alms, or an offering. And when ye are safe from
foes, he who contents himself with the Visitation of the holy places, until
the Pilgrimage, shall bring whatever offering shall be the easiest. But he
who findeth nothing to offer, shall fast three days in the Pilgrimage itself,
and seven days when ye return: they shall be ten days in all. This is binding
on him whose family shall not be present at the sacred Mosque. And fear God,
and know that God is terrible in punishing.

Let the Pilgrimage be made in the months already known:80 whoever therefore
undertaketh the Pilgrimage therein, let him not know a woman, nor transgress,
nor wrangle in the Pilgrimage. The good which ye do, God knoweth it. And
provide for your journey; but the best provision is the fear of God: fear me,
then, O men of understanding!

It shall be no crime in you if ye seek an increase from your Lord;81 and when
ye pour swiftly on from Arafat, then remember God near the holy monument; and
remember Him, because He hath guided you who before this were of those who
went astray:

Then pass on quickly82 where the people quickly pass, and ask pardon of God,
for God is Forgiving, Merciful.

And when ye have finished your holy rites, remember God as ye remember your
own fathers, or with a yet more intense remembrance! Some men there are who
say, "O our Lord! give us our portion in this world:" but such shall have no
portion in the next life:

And some say, "O our Lord! give us good in this world and good in the next,
and keep us from the torment of the fire."

They shall have the lot which they have merited: and God is swift to reckon.

Bear God in mind during the stated days: but if any haste away83 in two days,
it shall be no fault in him: And if any tarry longer, it shall be no fault in
him, if he fear God. Fear God, then, and know that to Him shall ye be
gathered.

A man there is84 who surpriseth thee by his discourse concerning this life
present. He taketh God to witness what is in his heart; yet is he the most
zealous in opposing thee:

And when he turneth his back on thee, he runneth through the land to enact
disorders therein, and layeth waste the fields and flocks: but God loveth not
the disorder.

And when it is said to him, "Fear God," the pride of sin seizeth him: but he
shall have his fill of Hell; and right wretched the couch!

A man, too, there is85 who selleth his very self out of desire to please God:
and God is good to his servants.

O believers! enter completely into the true religion, and follow not the
steps of Satan, for he is your declared enemy.

But if ye lapse after that our clear signs86 have come to you, know that God
is Mighty, Wise.

What can such expect but that God should come down to them overshadowed with
clouds, and the angels also, and their doom be sealed? And to God shall all
things return.

Ask the children of Isreal how many clear signs we have given them. But if
any man shall alter the boon87 of God after it shall have reached him,
assuredly God will be vehement in punishing him.

This present life is prepared for those who believe not, and who mock at the
faithful. But they who fear God shall be above them on the day of
resurrection; and God is bounteous without measure to whom He will.

Mankind was but one people;88 and God sent prophets to announce glad tidings
and to warn; and He sent down with them the Book of Truth, that it might
decide the disputes of men; and none disputed but those to whom the Book had
been given, after the clear tokens had reached them,-being full of mutual
jealousy. And God guided those who believed to the truth of that about which,
by his permission, they had disputed; for God guideth whom he pleaseth into
the straight path.

Think ye to enter Paradise, when no such things have come upon you, as on
those who flourish before you? Ills and troubles tried them; and so tossed
were they by trials, that the Apostle and they who shared his faith, said,
"When will the help of God come?"-Is not the help of God nigh?

They will ask thee what they shall bestow in alms. SAY: Let the good which ye
bestow be for parents, and kindred, and orphans, and the poor, and the
wayfarer; and whatever good ye do, of a truth God knoweth.

War is prescribed to you: but from this ye are averse.

Yet haply ye are averse from a thing, though it be good for you, and haply ye
love a thing though it be bad for you: And God knoweth; but ye, ye know not.

They will ask thee concerning war in the Sacred Month. SAY: To war therein is
bad, but to turn aside from the cause of God, and to have no faith in Him,
and in the Sacred Temple, and to drive out its people, is worse in the sight
of God; and civil strife is worse than bloodshed. They will not cease to war
against you until they turn you from your religion, if they be able: but
whoever of you shall turn from his religion and die an infidel, their works
shall be fruitless in this world, and in the next: they shall be consigned to
the fire; therein to abide for aye.

But they who believe, and who fly their country, and fight in the cause of
God may hope for God's mercy: and God is Gracious, Merciful.

They will ask thee concerning wine89 and games of chance. SAY: In both is
great sin, and advantage also, to men; but their sin is greater than their
advantage. They will ask thee also what they shall bestow in alms:

SAY: What ye can spare. Thus God sheweth you his signs that ye may ponder

On this present world, and on the next. They will also ask thee concerning
orphans. SAY: Fair dealing with them is best;

But if ye mix yourselves up (in their affairs)-they are your brethren: God
knoweth the foul dealer from the fair: and, if God pleased, he could indeed
afflict you! Verily, God is Mighty, Wise.

Marry not idolatresses until they believe; a slave who believeth is better
than an idolatress, though she please you more. And wed not your daughters to
idolaters until they believe; for a slave who is a believer, is than better
an idolater, though he please you.

They invite to the Fire; but God inviteth to Paradise, and to pardon, if he
so will, and maketh clear his signs to men that they may remember.

They will also question thee as to the courses of women. SAY: They are a
pollution. Separate yourselves therefore from women and approach them not,
until they be cleansed. But when they are cleansed, go in unto them as God
hath ordained for you. Verily God loveth those who turn to Him, and loveth
those who seek to be clean.

Your wives are your field: go in, therefore, to your field as ye will; but do
first some act for your souls' good: and fear ye God, and know that ye must
meet Him; and bear these good tidings to the faithful.

Swear not by God, when ye make oath, that ye will be virtuous and fear God,
and promote peace among men; for God is He who Heareth, Knoweth.

God will not punish you for a mistake in your oaths: but He will punish you
for that which your hearts have done. God is Gracious, Merciful.

They who intend to abstain from their wives shall wait four months; but if
they go back from their purpose, then verily God is Gracious, Merciful:

And if they resolve on a divorce, then verily God is He who Heareth, Knoweth.

The divorced shall wait the result, until they have had their courses thrice,
nor ought they to conceal what God hath created in their wombs, if they
believe in God and the last day; and it will be more just in their husbands
to bring them back when in this state, if they desire what is right. And it
is for the women to act as they (the husbands) act by them, in all fairness;
but the men are a step above them. God is Mighty, Wise.

Ye may divorce your wives twice: Keep them honourably, or put them away with
kindness. But it is not allowed you to appropriate to yourselves aught of
what ye have given to them, unless both fear that they cannot keep within the
bounds90 set up by God. And if ye fear that they cannot observe the
ordinances of God, no blame shall attach to either of you for what the wife
shall herself give for her redemption. These are the bounds of God: therefore
overstep them not; for whoever oversteppeth the bounds of God, they are evil
doers.

But if the husband divorce her a third time, it is not lawful for him to take
her again, until she shall have married another husband; and if he also
divorce her, then shall no blame attach to them if they return to each other,
thinking that they can keep within the bounds fixed by God. And these are the
bounds of God; He maketh them clear to those who have knowledge.

But when ye divorce women, and the time for sending them away is come, either
retain them with generosity, or put them away with generosity: but retain
them not by constraint so as to be unjust towards them. He who doth so, doth
in fact injure himself. And make not the signs of God a jest; but remember
God's favour toward you, and the Book and the Wisdom which He hath sent down
to you for your warning, and fear God, and know that God's knowledge
embraceth everything.

And when ye divorce your wives, and they have waited the prescribed time,
hinder them not from marrying their husbands when they have agreed among
themselves in an honourable way. This warning is for him among you who
believeth in God and in the last day. This is most pure for you, and most
decent. God knoweth, but ye know not.

Mothers, when divorced, shall give suck to their children two full years,91
if the father desire that the suckling be completed; and such maintenance and
clothing as is fair for them, shall devolve on the father. No person shall be
charged beyond his means. A mother shall not be pressed unfairly for her
child, nor a father for his child: And the same with the father's heir. But
if they choose to wean the child by consent and by bargain, it shall be no
fault in them. And if ye choose to have a nurse for your children, it shall
be no fault in you, in case ye pay what ye promised her according to that
which is fair. Fear God, and know that God seeth what ye do.

If those of you who die leave wives, they must await their state during four
months and ten days; and when this their term is expired, you shall not be
answerable for the way in which they shall dispose of themselves fairly. And
God is cognisant of what ye do.

And then shall no blame attach to you in making proposals of marriage92 to
such women, or in keeping such intention to yourselves? God knoweth that ye
will not forget them. But promise them not in secret, unless ye speak
honourable words;

And resolve not on the marriage tie until the prescribed time be reached; and
know that God knoweth what is in your minds: therefore, beware of Him; and
know that God is Gracious, Mild!

It shall be no crime in you if ye divorce your wives so long as ye have not
consummated the marriage, nor settled any dowry on them. And provide what is
needful for them he who is in ample circumstances according to his means, and
he who is straitened, according to his means-with fairness: This is binding
on those who do what is right.

But if ye divorce them before consummation, and have already settled a dowry
on them, ye shall give them half of what ye have settled, unless they make a
release, or he make a release in whose hand is the marriage tie. But if ye
make a release, it will be nearer to piety. And forget not generosity in your
relations one towards another; for God beholdeth your doings.

Observe strictly the prayers, and the middle93 prayer, and stand up full of
devotion towards God.

And if you have any alarm, then pray on foot or riding: but when you are
safe, then remember God, how he hath made you to know what ye knew not.

And94 such of you as shall die and leave wives, shall bequeath their wives a
year's maintenance without causing them to quit their homes; but if they quit
them of their own accord, then no blame shall attach to you for any
disposition they may make of themselves in a fair way. And God is Mighty,
Wise.

And for the divorced let there be a fair provision. This is a duty in those
who fear God.

Thus God maketh his signs clear to you that ye may understand.

Hast thou not thought on those who quitted their dwellings-and they were
thousands-for fear of death?95 God said to them, "Die:" then He restored them
to life, for full of bounty towards man is God. But most men give not thanks!

Fight for the cause of God; and know that God is He who Heareth, Knoweth.

Who is he that will lend to God a goodly loan? He will double it to him again
and again: God is close, but open handed also: and to Him shall ye return.

Hast thou not considered96 the assembly of the children of Israel after the
death of Moses, when they said to a prophet of theirs, "Set up for us a king;
we will do battle for the cause of God?" He said, "May it not be that if to
fight were ordained you, ye would not fight?" They said, "And why should we
not fight in the cause of God, since we and our children are driven forth
from our dwellings?" But when fighting was commanded them, they turned back,
save a few of them: But God knew the offenders!

And their prophet said to them, "Now hath God set (Talout) Saul king over
you." They said, "How shall he reign over us, when we are more worthy of the
kingdom than he, and of wealth he hath no abundance?" He said, "Verily God
hath chosen him to be over you, and hath given him increase in knowledge and
stature; God giveth his kingdom to whom he pleaseth; and God is Liberal,
Knowing!"

And their prophet said to them, "Verily, the sign of his kingship shall be
that the Ark shall come to you: in it is a pledge of security97 from your
Lord and the relics98 left by the family of Moses, and the family of Aaron;
the angels shall bear it: Truly herein shall be a sign indeed to you if ye
are believers."

And when Saul marched forth with his forces, he said, "God will test you by a
river: He who drinketh of it shall not be of my band; but he who shall not
taste it, drinking a drink out of the hand excepted, shall be of my band."99
And, except a few of them, they drank of it. And when they had passed it, he
and those who believed with him, the former said, "We have no strength this
day against (Djalout) Goliath and his forces:" But they who held it as
certain that they must meet God, said, "How oft, by God's will, hath a small
host vanquished a numerous host! and God is with the steadfastly enduring."

And when they went forth against Goliath and his forces, they said, "O our
Lord! pour out steadfastness upon us, and set our feet firm, and help us
against the infidels!"

And by the will of God they routed them; and (Daood) David slew Goliath; and
God gave him the kingship and wisdom, and taught him according to His will:
and were it not for the restraint of one by means of the other, imposed on
men by God, verily the earth had been utterly corrupted. But God is bounteous
to his creatures.

Such are the signs of God: with truth do we rehearse them to thee, for one of
the Sent Ones art Thou.

Some of the apostles we have endowed more highly than others: Those to whom
God hath spoken, He hath raised to the loftiest grade, and to Jesus the Son
of Mary we gave manifest signs, and we strengthened him with the Holy
Spirit.100 And if God had pleased, they who came after them would not have
wrangled, after the clear signs had reached them. But into disputes101 they
fell: some of them believed, and some were infidels; yet if God had pleased,
they would not have thus wrangled: but God doth what he will.

O Believers! give alms of that with which we have supplied you, before the
day cometh when there shall be no trafficking, nor friendship, nor
intercession. And the infidels are the wrong-doers.

God! There is no God but He; the Living, the Eternal; Nor slumber seizeth
Him, nor sleep; His, whatsoever is in the Heavens and whatsoever is in the
Earth! Who is he that can intercede with Him but by His own permission? He
knoweth what hath been before them and what shall be after them; yet nought
of His knowledge shall they grasp, save what He willeth. His Throne reacheth
over the Heavens and the Earth, and the upholding of both burdeneth Him not;
and He is the High, the Great!

Let there be no compulsion in Religion.102 Now is the right way made distinct
from error. Whoever therefore shall deny Thagout103 and believe in God-he
will have taken hold on a strong handle that shall not be broken: and God is
He who Heareth, Knoweth.

God is the patron of believers: He shall bring them out of darkness into
light:

As to those who believe not, their patrons are Thagout: they shall bring them
out of light into darkness: they shall be given over to the fire: they shall
abide therein for ever.

Hast thou not thought on him104 who disputed with Abraham about his Lord,
because God had given him the kingdom? When Abraham said, "My Lord is He who
maketh alive and cause to die:" He said, "It is I who make alive and cause to
die!" Abraham said, "Since God bringeth the sun from the East, do thou, then,
bring it from the West." The infidel was confounded; for God guideth not the
evil doers:

Or how he105 demeaned him who passed by a city which had been laid in
ruins.106 "How," said he, "shall God give life to this city, after she hath
been dead?" And God caused him to die for an hundred years, and then raised
him to life. And God said, "How long hast thou waited?" He said, "I have
waited a day or part of a day." He said, "Nay, thou hast waited an hundred
years. Look on thy food and thy drink; they are not corrupted; and look on
thine ass: we would make thee a sign unto men: And look on the bones of thine
ass, how we will raise them, then clothe them with flesh." And when this was
shewn to him, he said, "I acknowledge that God hath power to do all things."

When Abraham said, "O Lord, shew me how thou wilt give life to the dead!" He
said, "Hast thou not believed?"

He said, "Yes; but I have asked thee, that my heart may be well assured." He
said, "Take, then, four birds,107 and draw them towards thee, and cut them in
pieces; then place a part of them on every mountain; then call them and they
shall come swiftly to thee: and know thou that God is Might, Wise!"

The likeness of those who expend their wealth for the cause of God, is that
of a grain of corn which produceth seven ears, and in each ear a hundred
grains; and God will multiply to whom He pleaseth: God is Liberal, Knowing!

They who expend their wealth for the cause of God, and never follow what they
have laid out with reproaches or harm, shall have their reward with their
Lord; no fear shall come upon them, neither shall they be put to grief.

A kind speech and forgiveness is better than alms followed by injury. God is
Rich, Clement.

O ye who believe! make not your alms void by reproaches and injury, like him
who spendeth his substance to be seen of men, and believeth not in God and in
the latter day. The likeness of such an one is that of a rock with a thin
soil upon it, on which a heavy rain falleth but leaveth it hard: No profit
from their works shall they be able to gain; for God guideth not the
unbelieving people.

And the likeness of those who expend their substance from a desire to please
God, and for the stablishing of their souls, is as a garden on a hill, on
which the heavy rain falleth, and it yieldeth its fruits twofold; and even if
a heavy rain fall not on it, yet is there a dew: God beholdeth your actions.

Desireth any one of you a garden of palms and vines through which rivers
flow, in which he may have every fruit, and that old age should surprise him
there, and that his offspring should be weakly, and that then a fiery violent
wind shall strike it so that it shall be burned? Thus God maketh plain his
signs to you that ye may reflect.

O ye who believe! bestow alms of the good things which ye have acquired, and
of that which we have brought forth for you out of the earth, and choose not
the bad for almsgiving,

Such as ye would accept yourselves only by connivance: and know that God is
Rich, Praiseworthy.

Satan menaceth you with poverty,108 and enjoineth base actions: but God
promiseth you pardon from himself and abundance: God is All-bounteous,
Knowing.

He giveth wisdom to whom He will: and he to whom wisdom is given, hath had
much good given him; but none will bear it in mind, except the wise of heart.

And whatever alms ye shall give, or whatever vow ye shall vow, of a truth God
knoweth it: but they who act unjustly shall have no helpers. Give ye your
alms openly?109 it is well. Do ye conceal them and give them to the poor?
This, too, will be of advantage to you, and will do away your sins: and God
is cognisant of your actions.

Their guidance is not thine affair, O Muhammad; but God guideth whom he
pleaseth. And the good that ye shall give in alms shall redound unto
yourselves; and ye shall not give but as seeking the face of God; and
whatever good thing ye shall have given in alms, shall be repaid you, and ye
shall not be wronged. There are among you the poor, who being shut up to
fighting for the cause of God, have it not in their power to strike out into
the earth for riches. Those who know them not, think them rich because of
their modesty. By this their token thou shalt know them-they ask not of men
with importunity: and of whatever good thing ye shall give them in alms, of a
truth God will take knowledge.

They who give away their substance in alms, by night and day, in private and
in public, shall have their reward with their Lord: no fear shall come on
them, neither shall they be put to grief.

They who swallow down usury, shall arise in the resurrection only as he
ariseth whom Satan hath infected by his touch. This, for that they say,
"Selling is only the like of usury:" and yet God hath allowed selling, and
forbidden usury. He then who when this warning shall come to him from his
Lord, abstaineth, shall have pardon for the past, and his lot shall be with
God. But they who return to usury, shall be given over to the fire; therein
shall they abide for ever.

God will bring usury to nought, but will increase alms with usury, and God
loveth no infidel, or evil person. But they who believe and do the things
that are right, and observe the prayers, and pay the legal impost, they shall
have their reward with their Lord: no fear shall come on them, neither shall
they be put to grief.

O believers! fear God and abandon your remaining usury, if ye are indeed
believers.

But if ye do it not, then hearken for war on the part of God and his apostle:
yet if ye repent, ye shall have the principal of your money. Wrong not, and
ye shall not be wronged.

If any one find difficulty in discharging a debt, then let there be a delay
until it be easy for him: but if ye remit it as alms it will be better for
you, if ye knew it.

Fear the day wherein ye shall return to God: then shall every soul be
rewarded according to its desert, and none shall have injustice done to them.

O ye who believe! when ye contract a debt (payable) at a fixed date, write it
down, and let the notary faithfully note between you: and let not the notary
refuse to note, even as God hath taught him; but let him note it down, and
let him who oweth the debt dictate, and let him fear God his Lord, and not
diminish aught thereof. But if he who oweth the debt be foolish or weak, or
be not able to dictate himself, let his friend dictate for him with fairness;
and call to witness two witnesses of your people: but if there be not two
men, let there be a man, and two women of those whom ye shall judge fit for
witnesses: if the one of them should mistake, the other may cause her to
recollect. And the witnesses shall not refuse, whenever they shall be
summoned. And disdain not to put the debt in writing, be it large or small,
with its time of payment: this will be more just for you in the sight of God,
better suited for witnessing, and the best for avoiding doubt. But if the
goods be there present, and ye pass them from hand to hand-then it shall be
no fault in you not to write it down. And have witnesses when ye sell, and
harm not writer or witness: it will be a crime in you to do this. But fear
God and God will give you knowledge, for God hath knowledge of all things.

And if ye be on a journey and shall find no notary, let pledges be taken: but
if one of you trust the other, let him who is trusted, restore what he is
trusted with, and fear God his Lord. And refuse not to give evidence. He who
refuseth is surely wicked at heart: and God knoweth your deeds.

Whatever is in the Heavens and in the Earth is God's: and whether ye bring
forth to light what is in your minds or conceal it, God will reckon with you
for it; and whom He pleaseth will He forgive, and whom He pleaseth will He
punish; for God is All-powerful.

The apostle believeth in that which hath been sent down from his Lord, as do
the faithful also. Each one believeth in God, and His Angels, and His Books,
and His Apostles: we make no distinction between any of His Apostles.110 And
they say, "We have heard and we obey. Thy mercy, Lord! for unto thee must we
return."

God will not burden any soul beyond its power. It shall enjoy the good which
it hath acquired, and shall bear the evil for the acquirement of which it
laboured. O our Lord! punish us not if we forget, or fall into sin; O our
Lord! and lay not on us a load like that which thou hast laid on those who
have been before us; O our Lord! and lay not on us that for which we have not
strength: but blot out our sins and forgive us, and have pity on us. Thou art
our protector: give us victory therefore over the infidel nations.


_______________________

1 The greater part of this, the oldest of the Medina Suras, was revealed in
the early part of the second year of the Hejira and previously to the battle
of Bedr.-The Hejira took place in the beginning of Muharram, or middle of
April, A.D. 622. The numbers who emigrated with Muhammad at first, were about
150 persons. Medina is 250 miles north of Mecca, and ten days' journey.

2 Said to mean A mara li Muhammad, i.e. at the command of Muhammad; but see
Sura 1xviii. p. 32.

3 Death, Resurrection, Judgment, etc.

4 The Jews.

5 The Jews and Christians, hostile to the mission of Muhammad.

6 Lit. the similitude of them is as the similitude of, etc.

7 The people of Medina are generally addressed with "O ye who believe;" the
Meccans, with "O men." Hence it has been inferred that from verse 19 (O men)
to 37 inclusively, is of the Meccan period. The subjects treated of also lead
to this conclusion.

8 The statues of false gods.

9 It will be an agreeable surprise to the blessed to have fruits, which at
first sight resemble those of earth, but are infinitely more delicious,.

10 Muhammad had been reproached for having drawn illustrations from the Ant,
Bee, Spider, etc.

11 Concerning faith in Muhammad. See verse 39 below, note.

12 The number of the Heavens is borrowed from the Talmud, or traditions based
upon it; but the idea probably has its root in the Scriptural expression,
"Heaven of Heavens."

13 Lit. a caliph, vicegerent. "When the Holy One, Blessed be He, would create
man, He took counsel with the Angels and said to them, We will make man in
our image." Midr. Rabbah on Numb. iv. par. 19. Comp. Midr. on Gen. 1, par. 8,
17. Sanhedr. 38.

14 "God said to the Angels, 'His wisdom is greater than yours.' Then brought
he before them beasts, cattle, and birds, and asked for their names, but they
knew them not. But when he had created man," etc. Midr. as above.

15 Or, if ye are truthful, or can make good a better claim to the
vicegerency.

16 In the name Eblis (diabolos) and in the honour claimed for Adam as a kind
of Godman, there are traces of a Christian original, as well as in the
identification of the serpent with Satan. Comp. Ps. civ. 4; Heb. i. 6. The
Talmudists also enlarge on the honour paid to Adam. "Adam sat in the garden
and the Angels brought him flesh and cooling wine." Sanhedr. 29. "In the hour
when the Holy One, Blessed be He, created man, the Angels went astray in
regard to him, and essayed to say before him, 'O Holy One!' then God
permitted sleep to fall on him, and all knew that he was of earth." Midr.
Rabbah on Gen. par. 8. It is possible that the Arabic word balas, a
profligate, wicked person, may have influenced Muhammad in the formation of
the word Eblis. See note, p. 185. Eblis is used in the Arabic version of the
New Testament, for the probable date of which, see Tischendorf, Prol. p. 78.

17 Observe the change from Eblis, the calumniator, to Satan, the hater.

18 Muhammad rarely accused the Jews and Christians of corrupting, but often
of misinterpreting, their Sacred Books, in order to evade his claims. His
charges, however, are always very vaguely worded, and his utterances upon
this subject are tantamount to a strong testimony in favour of the
unimpeachable integrity of the sacred books, both of the Jews and Christians,
so far as he knew them. See Sura [lxxxvii.] vii. 168, and v. 73 below.

19 See Sura [lxv.] xxi. 49.

20 Lit. slay one another.

21 The Talmudists relate how the Israelites who had died, on hearing the
divine voice, etc., were restored by the intercession of the Law itself.
Sanh. 5.

22 By storing them up in violation of God's command.

23 Jericho according to some commentators, Jerusalem according to others, but
see verse 58.

24 See Sura [lxxxvii.] vii. 162.

25 Lit. all men. This incident is perhaps inadvertently borrowed from Ex. xv.
27.

26 This passage (comp. xxvi. 59) is one of the numerous anachronisms which
abound in the Koran and prove the gross ignorance of the Arabian Prophet.

27 The Sabeites are identical with the Mendaites, or so-called Christians of
S. John, residing in the marshy district at the mouth of the Euphrates, but
are not the same with the star-worshipping Sabians of Harran in Mesopotamia.
See D'Herbelot, Bibl. Or. under the word Sabi; Assemani, Bibl. Or. iii. 2,
609. For curious details as to the elements of the Sabeite religion, see
Chwolson's SSabier and SSabaismus I.

28 See Sura [lxxxvii.] vii. 170.

29 See Sura [lxxxvii.] vii. 164.

30 Compare Numb. xix.; Deut. xxii. 1-9. The cow was to be sacrificed in order
that a murderer might be discovered through the miracle to be wrought on the
corpse by a piece of her flesh.

31 To please you, O Muslims.

32 This is one of the passages which shews great familiarity with the habits
of the Jews, on the part of Muhammad. See Maracci's Prodr. i. 44. Wahl's
Einleitung, xxx. xxxv.

33 The Pentateuch. This passage shews that the art of writing was known in
Medina shortly after the Hejira.

34 Forty days; the period during which they worshipped the calf.

35 The blood of those who are as your own flesh.

36 Two Jewish tribes (Koreidha and Nadhir) in alliance with certain Arab
tribes who were at war, destroyed one another's abodes, but redeemed the
Jewish captives, professing that they were commanded to do this by the Law.
So the commentators.

37 Gabriel. Muhammad either knowingly rejected the divinity of the Holy
Ghost, or confounded Gabriel announcing the conception, with the Holy Spirit
that overshadowed Mary. It is probable that Muhammad's ideas of the Spirit
were at first indefinite, but that the two expressions, Gabriel and the Holy
Spirit, became ultimately synonymous. See note on Sura [lxvii.] xvii. 87.
Geiger (p. 82) quotes an instance in which the Jewish expositors understand
the distinctly-speaking Spirit (Sanhedr. 44) of Gabriel.

38 The gift of the prophetic office, etc., to a pagan Arab and not to a Jew.

39 Matt. xxiii. 37.

40 See Sura vii. 170, p. 309.

41 Comp. 1 Tim. v. 24.

42 In Solomon's Books of Magic. This story has been supposed to be of Persian
origin. See Hyde de Rel. Vet. Pers. ch. xii. But from a passage in the Midr.
Abhkhir quoted in the Midr. Jalkut, ch. 44, and from a quotation in Maracci's
Prodr. iv. 82, Geiger infers that Muhammad has transferred to the time of
Solomon, the Rabbinic traditions concerning the influence of angels upon men
at the time of the Deluge. p. 106. "Babel is regarded by the Muslims as the
fountain head of the science of magic. They suppose Haroot and Maroot to be
two angels who, in consequence of their want of compassion for the frailties
of mankind, were sent down to earth to be tempted. They both sinned; and
being permitted to choose whether they would be punished now or hereafter,
chose the former, and are still suspended by the feet at Babel in a rocky
pit, and are the great teachers of magic." (Lane on ch. iii. note 14 of the
1001 Nights.)

43 Raina, as pronounced in Hebrew, "our bad one;" but in Arabic, "look upon
us," a kind of salutation of the same signification as ondhorna, which,
however, does not admit of any secondary bad sense like raina.

44 Comp. Sura xvi. 103; iv. 84. The Muslims admit that there are 225 verses
cancelled by later ones. The doctrine of "abrogation" is taught in the
Talmud. Thus Hilchoth Mamrim, ii. 1, 2, etc.

45 That is, does not weigh the evidence for Muhammad's mission already given,
but demands, as the Jews did, to see God himself.

46 In all Muhammadan countries the first time of prayer is the moghreb or
sunset, or rather, four minutes later; the second the eshe, when it has
become quite dark; the third the soobh or fegr, the daybreak; the fourth,
doohr, or a little after noon, when the sun has begun to decline; the fifth,
the asr, midway between noon and nightfall. The obligatory legal alms or
impost are called, as here, zekah (lit. purity), the voluntary, sudackah. It
is, however, left to the conscience of individuals to give and to apply them
as they think fit.

47 The idolatrous Arabs.

48 If this verse is aimed at the Meccans who, in the 6th year of the Hejira,
forbad Muhammad and his followers to enter the temple of Mecca in the
expedition of Hodeibiya, it is misplaced here.

49 Abrogated by verse 139 below.

50 The Caaba.

51 Freytag (Einl. p. 339) says that there is no good reason for doubting that
the Caaba was founded as stated in this passage. See note on Sura [xcvii.]
iii. 90.

52 Deut. xviii. 15.

53 "At the time when our father Jacob quitted this world, be summoned his
twelve sons and said to them, Hearken to your father Israel (Gen. xlix. 2).
Have ye any doubts in your hearts concerning the Holy One, Blessed be He!
They said, Hear, O Israel, our Father. As there is no doubt in thy heart, so
neither is there in ours. For the Lord is our God, and He is one." Midr.
Rabbah on Gen. par. 98, and on Deut. par. 2. Comp. also Targ. Jer. on Deut.
vi. 4. Tract. Pesachim, 56.

54 See Sura [lxxiii.] xvi. 121, n., p. 209.

55 Ibn Batutah assures us (vol. ii. 10) that when in the 14th century he
visited Basra, he saw in the mosque the copy of the Koran which the Caliph
Othman had in his hands when murdered, and that the marks of his blood were
still visible at the words of this verse. Othman's originals are also said to
be preserved in Egypt, Morocco, Damascus, Mecca, and Medina. See M.
Quatremere in Journ. Asiatique, Juillet, 1838.

56 The original simply has Baptism of God. This may be understood either of
Islam generally, or, with Ullmann, in the more restricted sense of
circumcision. Perhaps Muhammad used the word advisedly as a hint to the
Christians of his land, that in the reception of his religion consisted the
true new birth.

57 Or, intermediate, i.e., according to the commentators, not addicted to
excess, just. Ullm. ein vermittelndes Volk, zwischen Juden und Christen die
Mitte haltend.

58 In having prayed towards Jerusalem.

59 Of Mecca. This change of the Kebla from Jerusalem to Mecca shows that this
part of the Sura was revealed at a time when the breach between Muhammad and
the Jews was past healing; i.c. in the first half of the second year of the
Hejira. See Thilo's. Cod. Apoc. p. 21, n.

60 That is, the Jews are really convinced of the truth of Muhammad's mission.

61 That is, warring with the infidels. The precise date of verses 148-152
depends upon whether this passage refers to the battle of Bedr or Ohod.

62 These words are constantly used by the pious Muslims when in any trouble.

63 Hills in the sacred territory of Mecca, which had long been objects of
superstitious reverence to the idolatrous Arabs, on which account the Muslims
were at first unwilling to include them among the sacred places.

64 The Pentateuch. See verse 141.

65 This and the three following verses are probably Meccan, as also verses
167-171.

66 The ringleaders of infidelity and idolatrous faiths.

67 Freyt. Lex. vol. ii. p. 477 Quid eos agere coegit quemadmodum damnati
agunt? But Mar. Quanta erit sustinentia corum!

68 To whom his brother, that is, any Arab or believer, shall remit the
penalty of death.

69 Of the stricter Mosaic lex talionis, as well of the ante-Islamitic Arabian
custom, by which the killing of a slave was avenged by the death of a free
man, and the killing of a woman by taking the life of a man. See Freyt. Einl.
p. 193. Comp. Ex. xxi. 23.

70 That is, by killing the manslayer.

71 On the word Furquan, see Sura [1xv.] xxi. 49.

72 A mutual comfort to each other.

73 Thus Misch. Berachoth, 1, 2, "Prayer is to be said as soon as one can
distinguish between a blue and white thread."

74 Judging from the minuteness of the precepts laid down in this and the
following verses to 193, it would appear that they were added at a late
period of Muhammad's residence at Medina.

75 Such appears to have been the superstitious custom of the Arabs after
their return from pilgrimages to Mecca.

76 Their driving you out of Mecca; or, the temptation (to idolatry).

77 Lit. the sacred month for the sacred month, and the sacred precincts or
things (for) reprisals. The meaning of this difficult passage is that in wars
for the cause of religion, the sacred month and the temple of Mecca may be
made the time and scene of contests, which then and there are usually
prohibited. For the most accurate information as to the Pilgrimage, see
Freytag, Einl. 418.

78 This shows that Muhammad inculcated the doctrine of entire freedom of the
will.

79 The greater Pilgrimage, which every Muslim is bound to perform once in his
life, is the Hadjat el Farz (the one obligatory Pilgrimage), or the Hadjat el
Islam. The Umrah, or little pilgrimage, may be performed at any time except
the pilgrimage season, and its ceremonies are much fewer. They are described
by Lieut. Burton in his "Pilgrimage," vol. iii. ch. xxviii.

80 Namely, Shaw√¢l, Dhu'lkaada, and Dhu'lhajja.

81 By trading during the Hadj.

82 The pilgrims move on very rapidly when in the immediate neighbourhood of
the Holy Places.

83 From the valley of Mina.

84 Said to have been one Al Akhnas Ibn Shoraik, a dissembler with Muhammad.

85 Sohaib, when he joined the standard of Muhammad, left all his property in
the hands of the infidels.

86 Verses 204-210 are probably addressed to those Muslims who were desirous
to observe certain parts of the Jewish law.

87 The Koran.

88 That is, there was originally but one religion in the world.

89 Comp. Sura [c.] iv. 42, and [cxiv.] v. 99, 100.

90 Limits, fences. The word is Talmudic. Thus Pirke Aboth, i. "The men of the
great synagogue said . . . Make a fence for the law;" and iii. 13, "Tradition
is a fence to the law."

91 Comp. Sura [lxxxii.] xxxi. 13.

92 Within the four months and ten days.

93 Either the asr, midway between noon and nightfall (see verse 104 above) or
the prayer immediately after midday. See note on Sura [c.] iv. 46.

94 This verse is certainly older than the commencement of Sura iv. which
alters the law here laid down.

95 Comp. Ezek. xxxvii. 1-10. These Jews are said by some commentators to have
abandoned their dwellings through fear of a pestilence (comp. Talmud Sanhed.
92); by others, for fear of being compelled to serve in the wars of God.

96 This and the seven following verses shew that Muhammad, foreseeing an open
rupture with the people of Medina at no distant period, felt it necessary to
stimulate the zeal and courage of his partisans by examples from Jewish
history.

97 Ar. Shechinah. See Freytag Lex. in v. This word, as well as the Arabic
word for ark (p. 95, n.) betray in their form a Rabbinic origin.

98 The shoes and rod of Moses, the mitre of Aaron, the vase of manna, the
fragments of the two tables of the law.

99 Observe the confusion between Gideon and Saul.

100 See verse 81.

101 The drift of these words, which are of such frequent recurrence in the
Koran, is, that the former revelations had been abused, and instead of
leading them to Islam broke them up into sects and dissentient parties.

102 This verse must have been revealed before Muhammad felt himself secure in
his new position at Medina.

103 A name applied to an idol or idols especially Allat and Ozza, the ancient
idols of the Meccans. The termination of the word Thagout is more Hebraic
than pure Arabic, and literally means error.

104 Nimrod.

105 Ozair or Esdras doubted whether Jerusalem could be rebuilt after its
destruction by Nebuchadnezzar, and the miracle here narrated, was wrought for
his assurance. The fable has its origin in the circuit made by Nehemiah
around the ruined city. Neh. ii. 13.

106 Lit. it was falling on its roofs.

107 Comp. Gen. xv. 9.

108 That is, Satan would dissuade you from liberal contributions by
instilling the fear of poverty.

109 Comp. Matt. vi. 3, 4. 110 This contradicts verse 254, as well as several
verses in Sura [1viii.] xix.


SURA XCVIII.-CLEAR EVIDENCE [XCII.]

MEDINA.-8 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

THE unbelievers among the people of the Book, and the Polytheists, did not
waver, until the CLEAR EVIDENCE had come to them;

A messenger from God, reciting to them the pure pages wherein are true
Scriptures!

Neither were they to whom the Scriptures were given divided into sects, till
after this clear evidence had reached them!

Yet was not aught enjoined on them but to worship God with sincere religion,
sound in faith; and to observe prayer and pay the stated alms. For this is
true religion.

But the unbelievers among the people of the Book, and among the Polytheists,
shall go into the fire of Gehenna to abide therein for aye. Of all creatures
are they the worst!

But they who believe and do the things that are right-these of all creatures
are the best!

Their recompense with their Lord shall be gardens of Eden, 'neath which the
rivers flow, in which they shall abide for evermore.

God is well pleased in them and they in Him! This, for him who feareth his
Lord.


SURA LXIV.-MUTUAL DECEIT [XCIII.]

MEDINA.1-18 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ALL that is in the Heavens, and all that is in the Earth, praiseth God: His
the Kingdom and His the Glory! And He hath power over all things!

It is He who hath created you all; yet some of you are infidel and others
believers: but God beholdeth all your actions.

He hath created the Heavens and the Earth in Truth; and He hath fashioned you
and given you goodly forms; and to Him must ye all return.

He knoweth all that passeth in the Heavens and in the Earth; and He knoweth
what ye hide and what ye bring to light; and God knoweth the very secrets of
men's breasts.

Hath not the story reached you of those who disbelieved of yore, and
therefore tasted the evil consequences of their doings? And a sore punishment
doth await them.

This, for that when their apostles came to them with the clear tokens, they
said, "What! shall men be our guides?" And they believed not and turned their
backs. But God can dispense with them; for God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy!

The infidels pretend that they shall not be raised from the dead. SAY: Yea,
by my Lord, ye shall surely be raised; then shall ye surely be told of your
deeds! And easy is this for God.

Believe then in God and his apostle and in the light which we have sent down;
for God is fully aware of all ye do.

The day when He shall gather you together for the day of mutual gathering,
will be the day of MUTUAL DECEIT,2 and whoso shall have believed in God and
done what is right, for him will He cancel his deeds of evil; and He will
bring him into the gardens beneath whose shades the rivers flow, to abide
therein for evermore. This will be the great bliss!

But the unbelieving-those who gave the lie to our signs-shall be the inmates
of the fire, wherein they shall remain for ever. And a wretched passage
thither!

No mischance chanceth but by God's permission; and whoso believeth in God,
that man's heart will he guide: and God knoweth all things.

Obey God then and obey the apostle: but if ye turn away, our apostle is not
to blame, for he is only charged with plain preaching.

God! there is no God but He! On God, then, let the faithful trust.

O ye who believe! Verily, in your wives and your children ye have an enemy:
wherefore beware of them. But if ye pass it3 over and pardon, and are
lenient, then God too is Lenient, Merciful.

Your wealth and your children are only a source of trial! but God! with Him
is the great recompense.

Fear God, then, with all your might, and hear and obey: and give alms for
your own weal; for such as are saved from their own greed, shall prosper.

If ye lend God a generous loan, He will double it to you and will forgive
you, for God is Grateful, Long-suffering.

He knoweth alike the Hidden and the Manifest: the Mighty, the Wise!


_______________________

1 The first verse of this Sura, and the phrase obey God and the Apostle
(verses 8, 12), which usually occurs only in Medina Suras, the phrases in
verse 16 compared with Sura [cii.] lix. 9, as well as the subject matter,
incline me to follow those Muslim commentators who are of opinion that the
whole Sura was revealed at Medina. Weil and Muir suppose it to be Meccan.

2 That is, the day on which it will be found that if the just had been wicked
they would have taken the place of the reprobates, while the reprobates will
see that if they had been just persons they would have gone to Paradise.

3 Their occasionally beguiling you from your duty, especially that of
contending for the faith. Comp. 1 Cor. vii. 32.


SURA LXII.-THE ASSEMBLY [XCIV.]

MEDINA.-II Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ALL that is in the Heavens, and all that is on the Earth, uttereth the Praise
of God, the King! the Holy! the Mighty! the Wise!

It is He who hath sent to the pagan folk (Arabs) an Apostle from among
themselves, to rehearse His signs to them, and to purify them, and to impart
to them a knowledge of "the Book" and wisdom; for aforetime were they in
manifest error.

And others among them have not yet overtaken those who preceded them in the
faith. But He is the Mighty, the Wise!

This is the goodness of God: He bestoweth it on whom He will: God is of
immense goodness!

They on whom the burden of the law was laid, and would not bear it, are like
an ass beneath a load of books. A sorry likeness this, for the people who
give the lie to the signs of God! God guideth not the people who do this
wrong!

SAY: O ye Jews, if ye profess that ye rather than other men are the friends
of God, then wish for death if ye are men of truth.

But never on account of their previous handywork will they wish for it, and
God knoweth the wrong doers.

SAY: Verily the death from which ye flee will surely meet you. Then shall ye
be brought back to Him who knoweth alike the things done in secret and
openly: and He will tell you of your actions.

O ye who believe! When ye are summoned to prayer on the day of THE ASSEMBLY,1
haste to the commemoration of God, and quit your traffic. This, if ye knew
it, will be best for you.

And when the Prayer is ended, then disperse yourselves abroad and go in quest
of the bounties of God; and, that it may be well with you, oft remember God.

But when they get a sight of merchandise or sport, they disperse after it,
and leave thee standing alone.2 SAY: God hath in reserve what is better than
sport or wares. And God is the best provider!


_______________________

1 Friday; the day on which Muhammad made his first entry into Medina, and the
day on which creation was finished.

2 It is said that when Muhammad was preaching, Dahya Alkalbi, while yet a
heathen, came, on a Friday, into Medina at the head of a caravan, and that
all the congregation, attracted by the music of the tambours which preceded
it, left the sermon for the spectacle. Muqu√¢til ap. Alfarr√¢. If this account
be accurate, we may approximate to the date of this Sura as in Hej. 5
(towards the close). Dahya is known to have fought in the ranks of the
Muslims at the battle of the Ditch. And as the former part is aimed at the
Jews, it is probably of the same period as Sura [xci.] ii.


SURA VIII.-THE SPOILS1 [XCV.]

MEDINA.-76 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

THEY will question thee about THE SPOILS. SAY: The spoils are God's and the
apostle's. Therefore, fear God, and settle this among yourselves; and obey
God and his apostle, if you are believers.

Believers are they only whose hearts thrill with fear when God is named, and
whose faith increaseth at each recital of his signs, and who put their trust
in their Lord;

Who observe the prayers, and give alms out of that with which we have
supplied them;

These are the believers: their due grade awaiteth them in the presence of
their Lord, and forgiveness, and a generous provision.

Remember how thy Lord caused thee to go forth from thy home2 on a mission of
truth, and part of the believers were quite averse to it:

They disputed with thee about the truth3 which had been made so clear, as if
they were being led forth to death, and saw it before them:

And remember when God promised you that one of the two troops4 should fall to
you, and ye desired that they who had no arms should fall to you: but God
purposed to prove true the truth of his words, and to cut off the uttermost
part ofthe infidels;

That he might prove his truth to be the truth, and bring to nought that which
is nought,5 though the impious were averse to it:

When ye sought succour of your Lord, and he answered you, "I will verily aid
you with a thousand6 angels, rank on rank:"

And God made this promise as pure good tidings, and to assure your hearts by
it: for succour cometh from God alone! Verily God is Mighty, Wise.

Recollect when sleep, a sign of security from Him, fell upon you, and he sent
down upon you water from Heaven that he might thereby cleanse you, and cause
the pollution of Satan to pass from you, and that he might gird up your
hearts, and stablish your feet by it:

When thy Lord spake unto the angels, "I will be with you: therefore stablish
ye the faithful. I will cast a dread into the hearts of the infidels." Strike
off their heads then, and strike off from them every finger-tip.

This, because they have opposed God and his apostle: And whoso shall oppose
God and his apostle. . . .  Verily, God will be severe in punishment.

"This for you! Taste it then! and for the infidels is the torture of the
fire!"

O ye who believe! when ye meet the marshalled hosts of the infidels, turn not
your backs to them:

Whoso shall turn his back to them on that day, unless he turn aside to fight,
or to rally to some other troop, shall incur wrath from God: Hell shall be
his abode and wretched the journey thither!

So it was not ye who slew them, but God slew them; and those shafts were
God's, not thine!7 He would make trial of the faithful by a gracious trial
from Himself: Verily, God Heareth, Knoweth.

This befel, that God might also bring to nought the craft of the infidels.

O Meccans! if ye desired a decision, now hath the decision come to you.8 It
will be better for you if ye give over the struggle. If ye return to it, we
will return; and your forces, though they be many, shall never avail you
aught, for God is with the faithful.

O ye faithful! obey God and his apostle, and turn not away from Him, now that
ye hear the truth;

And be not like those who say "We hear," when they hear not;

For the vilest beasts in God's sight, are the deaf, the dumb, who understand
not.

Had God known any good in them, he would certainly have made them hear. But
even if He had made them hear, they would certainly have turned back and
withdrawn afar.

O ye faithful! make answer to the appeal of God and his apostle when he
calleth you to that which giveth you life. Know that God cometh in between a
man and his own heart, and that to him shall ye be gathered.

And be afraid of temptation: the evil doers among you will not be the only
ones on whom it will light: And know ye that God is severe in punishment.

And remember when ye were few, and reputed weak in the land:9 ye feared lest
men should pluck you away; then was it that He took you in and strengthened
you with his help, and supplied you with good things, that haply ye might
give thanks.

O ye who believe! deal not falsely with God and his apostle; and be not false
in your engagements, with your own knowledge:

And know that your wealth and your children are a temptation; and that God!
with Him is a glorious recompense.

O ye who believe! if ye fear God he will make good your deliverance, and will
put away your sins from you, and will forgive you. God is of great
bounteousness!

And call to mind when the unbelievers plotted against thee, to detain thee
prisoner, or to kill thee, or to banish thee: They plotted-but God plotted:
and of plotters is God the best!

And oft as our signs were rehearsed to them, they said, "Now have we heard:
if we pleased we could certainly utter its like! Yes, it is mere tales of the
ancients."

And when they said, "God! if this be the very truth from before thee, rain
down stones upon us from Heaven, or lay on us some grievous chastisement."

But God chose not to chastise them while thou wast with them, nor would God
chastise them when they sued for pardon.

But because they debarred the faithful from the holy temple, albeit they are
not its guardians, nothing is there on their part why God should not chastise
them. The Godfearing only are its guardians; but most of them know it not.

And their prayer at the house of God is no other than whistling through the
fingers and clapping of the hands-"Taste then the torment, for that ye have
been unbelievers."

The infidels spend their riches10 with intent to turn men aside from the way
of God: spend it they shall; then shall sighing be upon them, and then shall
they be overcome.

And the infidels shall be gathered together into Hell,

That God may separate the bad from the good, and put the bad one upon the
other, and heap them all up and put them into Hell! These are they who shall
be lost.

SAY to the infidels: If they desist from their unbelief, what is now past
shall be forgiven them; but if they return to it, they have already before
them11 the doom of the ancients!

Fight then against them till strife be at an end, and the religion be all of
it God's. If they desist, verily God beholdeth what they do:

But if they turn their back, know ye that God is your protector: Excellent
protector! excellent helper!

And know ye, that when ye have taken any booty, a fifth12 part belongeth to
God and to the Apostle, and to the near of kin, and to orphans, and to the
poor, and to the wayfarer, if ye believe in God, and in that which we have
sent down to our servant on the day of the victory,13 the day of the meeting
of the Hosts. Over all things is God potent.

When ye were encamped on the near side of the valley, and they were on the
further side, and the caravan was below you, if ye had made an engagement to
attack ye would have failed the engagement; but ye were led into action
notwithstanding, that God might accomplish the thing destined to be done:

That he who should perish might perish with a clear token14 before him, and
that he who liveth might live with it. And verily, God Heareth, Knoweth.

Remember when God shewed them to thee in thy dream, as few: Had he shown them
numerous, ye would certainly have become fainthearted, and would certainly
have disputed about the matter-But from this God kept you-He knoweth the very
secrets of the breast-

And when, on your meeting, he made them to appear to your eyes as few, and
diminished you in their eyes, that God might carry out the thing that was to
be done.15 To God do all things return.

Believers! when ye confront a troop, stand firm and make frequent mention of
the name of God, that it may fare well with you:

And obey God and his Apostle; and dispute not, lest ye become fainthearted
and your success go from you; but endure with steadfastness, for God is with
the steadfastly enduring.

And be not like those Meccans who came out of their houses insolently and to
be seen of men, and who turn others from the way of God: God is round about
their actions.

When Satan prepared their works for them, and said, "No man shall conquer you
this day; and verily I will be near to help you:" But when the two armies
came in sight, he turned on his heel and said, "Ay, I am clear of you: ay, I
see what ye see not:16 ay, I fear God; for God is severe in punishing."

When the hypocrites and the diseased of heart said, "Their Religion hath
misled the Muslims:17 But whoso putteth his trust in God. , , ,  Yes, verily
God is Mighty, Wise!

If thou didst see, when the angels cause the infidels to die! They smite
their faces and their backs, and-"Taste ye the torture of the burning:

This, for what your hands have sent on before you:"-and God is not unjust to
his servants.

Their state is like that of the people of Pharaoh and of those before them
who believed not in the signs of God: therefore God seized upon them in their
sin! God is Mighty, severe in punishing.

This, because God changeth not the favour with which he favoureth a people,
so long as they change not what is in their hearts; and for that God Heareth,
Knoweth.

Their state is like that of the people of Pharaoh, and of those before them
who treated their Lord's signs as lies. We therefore destroyed them in their
sins, and we drowned the people of Pharaoh; for they were all doers of wrong.

The worst beasts truly in the sight of God are the thankless who will not
believe;

They with whom thou hast leagued, and who are ever breaking their league, and
who fear not God!

If thou take them in war, then, by the example of their fate, scatter those
who shall follow them-that they may be warned:

Or if thou fear treachery from any people, throw back their treaty to them as
thou fairly mayest,18 for God loveth not the treacherous.

And think not that the infidels shall escape Us! They shall not weaken God.

Make ready then against them what force ye can, and strong squadrons whereby
ye may strike terror into the enemy of God and your enemy, and into others
beside them whom ye know not, but whom God knoweth. All that you shall expend
for the cause of God shall be repaid you; and ye shall not be wronged.

And if they lean to peace, lean thou also to it; and put thy trust in God:
for He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

But if they seek to betray thee, God will be all-sufficient for thee. He it
is who hath strengthened thee with His help, and with the faithful, and hath
made their hearts one. Hadst thou spent all the riches of the earth, thou
couldst not have united their hearts; but God hath united them, for He is
Mighty, Wise.

O prophet! God, and such of the faithful as follow thee, will be all-
sufficient for thee.

O prophet! stir up the faithful to the fight. Twenty of you who stand firm
shall vanquish two hundred: and if there be a hundred of you they shall
vanquish a thousand of the infidels, for they are a people devoid of
understanding.

Now hath God made your work easy, for he knoweth how weak ye are. If there be
an hundred of you who endure resolutely, they shall vanquish two hundred; and
if there be a thousand of you, they shall vanquish two thousand19 by God's
permission; for God is with those who are resolute to endure.

No prophet hath been enabled to take captives until he had made great
slaughter in the earth. Ye desire the passing fruitions of this world, but
God desireth the next life for you. And God is Mighty, Wise.

Had there not been a previous ordinance20 from God, a severe chastisement had
befallen you, for the ransom which ye took.

Eat therefore of the spoils ye have taken what is lawful and good; and fear
God: God is Gracious, Merciful.

O prophet! say to the captives who are in your hands, "If God shall know
good21 to be in your hearts, He will give you good beyond all that hath been
taken from you, and will forgive you: for God is Forgiving, Merciful."

But if they seek to deal treacherously with you-they have already dealt
treacherously22 with God before! Therefore hath He given you power over them.
God is Knowing, Wise.

Verily, they who have believed and fled their homes and spent their substance
for the cause of God, and they who have taken in the prophet and been helpful
to him, shall be near of kin the one to the other. And they who have
believed, but have not fled their homes, shall have no rights of kindred with
you at all, until they too fly their country. Yet if they seek aid from you
on account of the faith, your part it is to give them aid, except against a
people between whom and yourselves there shall be a treaty. And God beholdeth
your actions.

The infidels lend one another mutual help. Unless ye do the same, there will
be discord in the land and great corruption.

But as for those who have believed and fled their country, and fought on the
path of God, and given the prophet an asylum, and been helpful to him, these
are the faithful; Mercy is their due and a noble provision.

And they who have believed and fled their country since, and have fought at
your side, these also are of you. Those who are united by ties of blood23 are
the nearest of kin to each other. This is in the Book of God. Verily, God
knoweth all things.

_______________________

1 On this Sura, which relates mainly to the battle of Bedr, see Weil's M. der
Prophet, p. 268.

2 At Medina.

3 The necessity for the combat and its probable result.

4 Muhammad had conceived the design of attacking an unarmed caravan belonging
to the Koreisch on its way from Syria to Mecca. Abu Sofian, who had charge of
it, sent to Mecca for succour, whence a body of nearly 1000 armed men at once
set out to his assistance. Some of the Muslims were anxious to attack the
caravan: others, notwithstanding the disparity of numbers, proposed to throw
themselves upon the succours.

5 Idolatry.

6 In Sura [xcvii.] iii. the angels are said to be 3000.

7 Lit. thou didst not cast when thou didst cast, but God cast. This is
explained of the miracle of the gravelstones and sand cast by God into the
eyes of the Meccans at Bedr.

8 That is, by our victory over you.

9 Muhammad specially addresses the Mohadjers in this verse, i.e. those who
had fled with him to Medin.

10 Twelve of the Koreisch had given camels and a large sum of money in aid of
the Meccan succours.

11 Lit. hath preceded.

12 Before Islam it had been the custom among the Arabians to assign a fourth
part of the booty to the leader of an expedition. See Freyt. Einl. p. 266.

13 That is, on the day of the battle of Bedr. See Sura xxi. 49, p. 154.

14 The mission of Gabriel to Muhammad with the promise of victory.

15 Compare the different account in Sura [xcvii.] iii. II. The commentators,
however, get over the discropancy by explaining the apparent diminution of
the Muslims at the commencement only of the battle, which had the effect of
drawing on the enemy in self-confidence.

16 The angels fighting for the Muslims.

17 By inducing them to attack so greatly superior a force.

18 Thus Beidh. Or, more simply, render them the like.

19 Comp. Lev. xxvi. 8; Josh. xxiii. 10.

20 Authorising the ransom of captives.

21 That is, a disposition to become Muslims.

22 That is, on account of their infidelity.

23 See Weil. Life of M. p. 84, n.


SURA1 XLVII.-MUHAMMAD [XCVI.]

MEDINA.-40 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHOSO believe not, and prevent others from the way of God-their works will He
cause to miscarry;2

But whoso believe, and do things that are right, and believe in what hath
been sent down to MUHAMMAD-for it is the truth from their Lord-their sins
will He cancel, and dispose their hearts aright.

This-because the infidels followed vanity, while those who believe, followed
the truth from their Lord. Thus to men doth God set forth their likenesses.

When ye encounter the infidels,3 strike off their heads till ye have made a
great slaughter among them, and of the rest make fast the fetters.

And afterwards let there either be free dismissals or ransomings, till the
war hath laid down its burdens. Thus do. Were such the pleasure of God, he
could himself take vengeance upon them: but He would rather prove the one of
you by the other. And whoso fight for the cause of God, their works he will
not suffer to miscarry;

He will vouchsafe them guidance, and dispose their hearts aright;

And he will bring them into the Paradise, of which he hath told them.

Believers! if ye help God, God will help you, and will set your feet firm:

But as for the infidels, let them perish: and their works shall God bring to
nought:

This-because they were averse from the command which God sent down;
Fruitless, therefore, shall their works become!

Have they not journeyed through the land, and seen what hath been the end of
those who flourished before them? God brought destruction on them: and the
like of this doth await the infidels.

This-because God is the protector of those who believe, and because the
infidels have no protector.

Verily God will bring those who believe, and do the things that are right,
into the Gardens, beneath whose shades the rivers flow: but they who believe
not, take their fill, and eat as the beasts eat! And their dwelling-place the
fire!

And how many cities were mightier in strength than thy city, which hath
thrust thee forth!4 We destroyed them, and there was none to help them.

Shall he who followeth the clear teaching of his Lord be as he, the evil of
whose doings hath been made to seem good to him, or like those who follow
their own lusts?

A picture of the Paradise which is promised to the God-fearing! Therein are
rivers of water, which corrupt not: rivers of milk, whose taste changeth not:
and rivers of wine, delicious to those who quaff it;

And rivers of honey clarified: and therein are all kinds of fruit for them
from their Lord! Is this like the lot of those who must dwell for ever in the
fire? and shall have draughts of boiling water forced on them which will rend
their bowels asunder?

Some of them indeed hearken to thee, until when they go out from thee, they
say with sneers to those to whom "the knowledge" hath been given, "What is
this he said?" These are they whose hearts God hath sealed up, and who follow
their own lusts.

But as to those who have the guidance, He will increase their guidance, and
He will teach them what to fear.

For what do the infidels wait, but that the Hour come suddenly on them?
Already are its signs come,5 and when it hath come on them indeed, how can
they be warned then?

Know, then, that there is no god but God: and ask pardon for thy sin, and for
believers, both men and women. God knoweth your busy movements, and your
final resting-places.

The believers say, "Oh, would that a Sura were sent down!"6 but when a
peremptory Sura is revealed, whose burden is war, thou mayest see the
diseased of heart look toward thee, with a look of one on whom the shadows of
death have fallen! But better in them would be obedience and becoming
language.

And if, when the command for war is issued, they are true to God, it will be
assuredly best for them.

Were ye not ready, if ye had turned back from Him, to spread disorder in the
land, and violate the ties of blood?

These are they whom God hath cursed, and made deaf, and blinded their eyes!

Will they not then meditate on the Koran? Are locks upon their hearts?

But as to those who return to their errors after "the guidance" hath been
made plain to them, Satan shall beguile them, and fill them with his
suggestions.

This-because they say to those who abhor what God hath sent down, "We will
comply with you in part of what ye enjoin." But God knoweth their secret
reservations.

But how? When the angels, in causing them to die, shall smite them on the
face and back!

This because they follow that which angereth God, and abhor what pleaseth
Him: therefore will He make their works fruitless.

Think these men of diseased hearts, that God will not bring out their malice
to light?

If such were our pleasure, we could point them out to thee, and thou surely
know them by their tokens: and know them thou shalt, by the strangeness of
their words.7 God knoweth your doings.

And we will surely test you, until we know the valiant and the steadfast
among you: and we will test the reports of your conduct.

Verily they who believe not, and turn others from the way of God, and
separate from the Apostle after that "the guidance" hath been clearly shewn
them, shall in no way injure God: but their works shall he bring to nought.

Believers! obey God and the Apostle: and render not your works vain.

Verily those who believe not, and who pervert others from the way of God, and
then die in unbelief, God will not forgive.

Be not fainthearted then; and invite not the infidels to peace when ye have
the upper hand: for God is with you, and will not defraud you of the
recompense of your works.

Surely this present life is only a play, and pastime! but if ye believe, fear
God; He will give you your rewards: but He will not ask all your riches of
you.

Should He ask them of you, and urge you, ye would shew yourself niggards: and
He would bring your grudges to light.

Lo! ye are they, who are called to expend for the cause of God: and some of
you are niggards: but whoso is niggardly shall be niggard only to his own
loss; for God is the Rich, and ye are the poor: and if ye turn back, He will
change you for another people,8 and they shall not be your like!


_______________________

1 This Sura was revealed at a period after the victory at Bedr, when there
was still some hesitation on the part of Muhammad's followers to take decided
steps for securing their position. See 37.

2 Lit. will He cause to wander, that is, from their proper aim and end, the
rewards of Paradise. See verse 5 ad f.

3 The Meccans and other unbelievers of Muhammad's time. The Hanefites suppose
this law to apply only to the battle of Bedr. The Shiites take it as of
universal obligation.

4 This verse is said (by Omar b. Muhammad, and Itq. 43) to be the expression
of Muhammad's feelings at the injuries inflicted on Mecca. He is reported to
have wept over it.

5 The first sign being the mission of Muhammad; the second, the splitting of
the moon; the third, the smoke mentioned in Sura xliv. p. 89.

6 That is, commanding war against the infidels.

7 Unintelligible or affected words, applied to the new religion in contempt.
See Sura [xci.] ii. 56, p. 343.

8 Matt. xxi. 43.


SURA III.-THE FAMILY OF IMRAN1 [XCVII.]

MEDINA.-200 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM.2 God! there is no god but He, the Living, the Merciful!

In truth hath He sent down to thee "the Book," which confirmeth those which
precede it: For He had sent down the Law, and the Evangel aforetime, as man's
Guidance; and now hath He sent down the "Illumination."3 (Furkan.)

Verily for those who believe not in the signs of God, is a severe
chastisement! And God is Mighty, the Avenger!

God! nought that is in Earth or that is in Heaven, is hidden unto Him. He it
is who formeth you in your mothers' wombs. There is no god but He; the
Mighty, the Wise!

He it is who hath sent down to thee "the Book." Some of its signs are of
themselves perspicuous;-these are the basis4 of the Book-and others are
figurative. But they whose hearts are given to err, follow its figures,
craving discord, craving an interpretation; yet none knoweth its
interpretation but God. And the stable in knowledge say, "We believe in it:
it is all from our Lord." But none will bear this in mind, save men endued
with understanding.

O our Lord! suffer not our hearts to go astray after that thou hast once
guided us, and give us mercy from before thee; for verily thou art He who
giveth.

O our Lord! For the day of whose coming there is not a doubt, thou wilt
surely gather mankind together. Verily, God will not fail the promise.

As for the infidels, their wealth, and their children, shall avail them
nothing against God. They shall be fuel for the fire.

After the wont of the people of Pharaoh, and of those who went before them,
they treated our signs as falsehoods. Therefore God laid hold of them in
their sins; and God is severe in punishing!

Say to the infidels: ye shall be worsted, and to Hell shall ye be gathered
together; and wretched the couch!

Ye have already had a sign5 in the meeting of the two hosts. The one host
fought in the cause of God, and the other was infidel. To their own eyesight,
the infidels saw you twice as many as themselves: And God aided with his
succour whom He would: And in this truly was a lesson for men endued with
discernment.

Fair-seeming to men is the love of pleasures from women and children, and the
treasured treasures of gold and silver, and horses of mark, and flocks, and
cornfields! Such the enjoyment of this world's life. But God! goodly the home
with Him.

SAY: Shall I tell you of better things than these, prepared for those who
fear God, in His presence? Theirs shall be gardens, beneath whose pavilions
the rivers flow, and in which shall they abide for aye: and wives of
stainless purity, and acceptance with God: for God regardeth his servants-

Who say, "O our Lord! we have indeed believed; pardon us our sins, and keep
us from the torment of the fire;"-

The patient, and the truthful, the lowly, and the charitable, and they who
seek pardon at each daybreak.

God witnesseth that there is no god but He: and the angels, and men endued
with knowledge, stablished in righteousness, proclaim "There is no god but
He, the Mighty, the Wise!"

The true religion with God is Islam: and they to whom the Scriptures had been
given, differed not till after "the knowledge"6 had come to them, and through
mutual jealousy. But as for him who shall not believe in the signs of God-God
will be prompt to reckon with him!

If they shall dispute with thee, then SAY: I have surrendered myself to God,
as have they who follow me.

SAY to those who have received the Book, and to the common folk, Do ye
surrender yourselves unto God?7 If they become Muslims, then are they guided
aright: but if they turn away-thy duty is only preaching; and God's eye is on
His servants.

But to those who believe not in the signs of God, and unjustly slay the
prophets, and slay those men who enjoin uprightness,-announce an afflictive
chastisement.

These are they whose works come to nought in this world, and in the next; and
none shall they have to help them!

Hast thou not marked those who have received a portion of the Scriptures,
when they are summoned to the Book of God, that it may settle their
differences? Then did a part of them turn back, and withdrew far off.

This-because they said, "The fire shall by no means touch us, but for certain
days:"-Their own devices have deceived them in their religion.

But how, when we shall assemble them together for the day of (which) whose
coming there is no doubt, and when every soul shall be paid what it hath
earned, and they shall not be wronged?

SAY: O God, possessor of all power,8 thou givest power to whom thou wilt, and
from whom thou wilt, thou takest it away! Thou raisest up whom thou wilt, and
whom thou wilt thou dost abase! In thy hand is good; for thou art over all
things potent.

Thou causest the night to pass into the day, and thou causest the day to pass
into the night. Thou bringest the living out of the dead, and thou bringest
the dead out of the living; and thou givest sustenance to whom thou wilt,
without measure.

Let not believers take infidels for their friends rather than believers:
whoso shall do this hath nothing to hope from God-unless, indeed, ye fear a
fear from them: But God would have you beware of Himself; for to God ye
return. SAY: Whether ye hide what is in your breasts, or whether ye publish
it abroad, God knoweth it: He knoweth what is in the heavens and what is in
the earth; and over all things is God potent.

On that day shall every soul find present to it, whatever it hath wrought of
good: and as to what it hath wrought of evil, it will wish that wide were the
space between itself and it! But God would have you beware of Himself; for
God is kind to His servants.

SAY: If ye love God, then follow me: God will love you, and forgive your
sins, for God is Forgiving, Merciful. SAY: Obey God and the Apostle; but if
ye turn away, then verily, God loveth not the unbelievers.

Verily above all human beings did God choose Adam, and Noah, and the family
of Abraham, and the family of IMRAN, the one the posterity of the other: And
God Heareth, Knoweth.

Remember when the wife of Imran9 said, "O my Lord! I vow to thee what is in
my womb, for thy special service. Accept it from me, for thou Hearest,
Knowest!" And when she had given birth to it, she said, "O my Lord! Verily I
have brought forth a female,"-God knew what she had brought forth; a male is
not as a female10-"and I have named her Mary, and I take refuge with thee for
her and for her offspring, from Satan the stoned."11

So with goodly acceptance did her Lord accept her, and with goodly growth did
he make her grow.12 Zacharias reared her. So oft as Zacharias went in to Mary
at the sanctuary, he found her supplied with food.13 "Oh, Mary!" said he,
"whence hast thou this?" She said, "It is from God; for God supplieth whom He
will, without reckoning!"

There did Zacharias call upon his Lord: "O my Lord!" said he, "vouchsafe me
from thyself good descendants,14 for thou art the hearer of prayer." Then did
the angels call to him, as he stood praying in the sanctuary:15

"God announceth John (Yahia) to thee, who shall be a verifier of the word
from God, and a great one, chaste, and a prophet of the number of the just."

He said, "O my Lord! how shall I have a son, now that old age hath come upon
me, and my wife is barren?" He said, "Thus will God do His pleasure."

He said, "Lord! give me a token." He said, "Thy token shall be, that for
three days thou shalt speak to no man but by signs: But remember thy Lord
often, and praise him at even and at morn:"

And remember when the angels said, "O Mary! verily hath God chosen thee,16
and purified thee, and chosen thee above the women of the worlds!

O Mary! be devout towards thy Lord,17 and prostrate thyself, and bow down
with those who bow."

This is one of the announcements of things unseen by thee: To thee, O
Muhammad! do we reveal it; for thou wast not with them when they cast lots
with reeds18 which of them should rear Mary; nor wast thou with them when
they disputed about it.

Remember when the angel said, "O Mary! Verily God announceth to thee the Word
from Him: His name shall be, Messiah Jesus the son of Mary,19 illustrious in
this world, and in the next, and one of those who have near access to God;

And He shall speak to men alike when in the cradle and when grown up; And he
shall be one of the just."

She said, "How, O my Lord! shall I have a son, when man hath not touched me?"
He said, "Thus: God will create what He will; When He decreeth a thing, He
only saith, 'Be,' and it is."

And he will teach him the Book, and the Wisdom, and the Law, and the Evangel;
and he shall be an apostle to the children of Israel. "Now have I come," he
will say, "to you with a sign from your Lord: Out of clay will I make for
you, as it were, the figure of a bird: and I will breathe into it, and it
shall become, by God's leave, a bird.20 And I will heal the blind, and the
leper; and by God's leave will I quicken the dead; and I will tell you what
ye eat, and what ye store up in your houses! Truly in this will be a sign for
you, if ye are believers.

And I have come to attest the law which was before me; and to allow you part
of that which had been forbidden you; and I come to you with a sign from your
Lord: Fear God, then, and obey me; of a truth God is my Lord, and your Lord:
Therefore worship Him. This is a right way."

And when Jesus perceived unbelief on their part, He said, "Who my helpers
with God?"20-21 The apostles21 said, "We will be God's helpers! We believe in
God, and bear thou witness that we are Muslims.

O our Lord! we believe in what thou hast sent down, and we follow the
apostle; write us up, then, with those who bear witness to him."

And the Jews plotted, and God plotted: But of those who plot is God the best.

Remember when God said, "O Jesus! verily I will cause thee to die,22 and will
take thee up to myself and deliver thee from those who believe not; and I
will place those who follow thee above those who believe not, until the day
of resurrection. Then, to me is your return, and wherein ye differ will I
decide between you.

And as to those who believe not, I will chastise them with a terrible
chastisement in this world and in the next; and none shall they have to help
them."

But as to those who believe, and do the things that are right, He will pay
them their recompense. God loveth not the doers of evil.

These signs, and this wise warning do we rehearse to thee.

Verily, Jesus is as Adam in the sight of God.23 He created him of dust: He
then said to him, "Be"-and he was.

The truth from thy Lord! Be not thou, therefore, of those who doubt.

As for those 24 who dispute with thee about Him, after "theknowledge" hath
come to thee, SAY: Come,25 let us summon our sons and your sons, our wives
and your wives, and ourselves and yourselves. Then will we invoke and lay the
malison of God on those that lie!

This recital is very truth, and there is no god but God; and verily God is
the Mighty, the Wise.

But if they turn away, then verily God hath knowledge of the corrupt doers.

SAY: O people of the Book! come ye to a just judgment between us and you-That
we worship not aught but God, and that we join no other god with Him, and
that the one of us take not the other for lords,26 beside God. Then if they
turn their backs, SAY: Bear ye witness that we are Muslims.

O people of the Book! Why dispute about Abraham,27 when the Law and the
Evangel were not sent down till after him? Do ye not then understand?

Lo! ye are they who dispute about that in which ye have knowledge; 28 but why
dispute ye about that of which ye have no knowledge? God hath knowledge, but
ye know nothing.

Abraham was neither Jew nor Christian; but he was sound in the faith,29 a
Muslim; and not of those who add gods to God.

They among men, who are nearest of kin to Abraham, are surely those who
follow him, and this prophet Muhammad, and they who believe on him. And God
is the protector of the faithful.

A party among the people of the Book would fain mislead you: but they only
mislead themselves, and perceive it not.

O people of the Book! why disbelieve the signs of God, of which yourselves
have been witnesses?

O people of the Book! why clothe ye the truth with falsehood? Why wittingly
hide the truth?

Others of the people of the Book say: "Believe in what hath been sent down to
the believers, at daybreak, and deny it at its close"-Thus do they go back-

"And believe in those only who follow your Religion." SAY: True guidance is
guidance from God-that to others may be imparted the like of what hath been
imparted to you. Will they wrangle then with you in the presence of their
Lord? SAY: Plenteous gifts are in the hands of God: He imparteth them unto
whom He will, and God is Bounteous, Wise.

He will vouchsafe His mercy to whom He will, for God is of great
bounteousness.

Among the people of the Book are some, to one of whom if thou entrust a
thousand dinars, he will restore them to thee: And there is of them to whom
if thou entrust a dinar, he will not restore it to thee, unless thou be ever
instant with him.

This-because they say, "We are not bound to keep faith with the ignorant
(Pagan) folk, and they utter a lie against God, and know they do so:"

But whoso is true to his engagement, and feareth God,-verily God loveth those
that fear Him.

Verily they who barter their engagement with God, and their oaths, for some
paltry price-These! no portion for them in the world to come! and God will
not speak to them, and will not look on them, on the day of resurrection, and
will not assoil them! for them, a grievous chastisement!

And some truly are there among them who torture the Scriptures with their
tongues, in order that ye may suppose it to be from the Scripture, yet it is
not from the Scripture. And they say, "This is from God;" yet it is not from
God: and they utter a lie against God, and they know they do so.

It beseemeth not a man, that God should give him the Scriptures and the
Wisdom, and the gift of prophecy, and that then he should say to his
followers, "Be ye worshippers of me, as well as of God;" 30 but rather, "Be
ye perfect in things pertaining to God, since ye know the Scriptures, and
have studied deep."

God doth not command you to take the angels or the prophets as lords.31 What!
would he command you to become infidels after ye have been Muslims?

When God entered into covenant with the prophets,32 he said, "This is the
Book and the Wisdom which I give you. Hereafter shall a prophet came unto you
to confirm the Scriptures already with you. Ye shall surely believe on him,
and ye shall surely aid him. Are ye resolved?" said he, "and do ye accept the
covenant on these terms?" They said, "We are resolved;" "Be ye then the
witnesses," said he, "and I will be a witness as well as you.

And whoever turneth back after this, these are surely the perverse."

Other religion than that of God desire they? To him doth everything that is
in the Heavens and in the Earth submit, in willing or forced obedience! and
to Him do they return.

SAY: We believe in God, and in what hath been sent down to us, and what hath
been sent down to Abraham, and Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes,
and in what was given to Moses, and Jesus, and the Prophets, from their Lord.
We make no difference between them. And to Him are we resigned (Muslims).

Whoso desireth any other religion than Islam, that religion shall never be
accepted from him, and in the next world he shall be among the lost.

How shall God guide a people who, after they had believed and bore witness
that the apostle was true, and after that clear proofs of his mission had
reached them, disbelieved? God guideth not the people who transgress.

These! their recompense, that the curse of God, and of angels, and of all
men, is on them!

Under it shall they abide for ever; their torment shall not be assuaged! nor
shall God even look upon them!-

Save those who after this repent and amend; for verily God is Gracious,
Merciful!

As for those who become infidels, after having believed, and then increase
their infidelity-their repentance shall never be accepted. These! they are
the erring ones.

As for those who are infidels, and die infidels, from no one of them shall as
much gold as the earth could contain be accepted, though he should offer it
in ransom. These! a grievous punishment awaiteth them; and they shall have
none to help them.

Ye shall never attain to goodness till ye give alms of that which ye love;
and whatever ye give, of a truth God knoweth it.

All food was allowed to the children of Israel, except what Jacob forbad
himself, ere the law was sent down; SAY: Bring ye then the law and read it,
if ye be men of truth.

And whoso after this inventeth the lie about God: These are evil doers.

SAY: God speaketh truth. Follow, therefore, the religion of Abraham, the
sound in faith, who was not one of those who joined other gods to God.

The first temple that was founded for mankind, was that in Becca,33-Blessed,
and a guidance to human beings.

In it are evident signs, even the standing-place34 of Abraham: and he who
entereth it is safe. And the pilgrimage to the temple, is a service due to
God from those who are able to journey thither.

And as to him who believeth not-verily God can afford to dispense with all
creatures!

SAY: O people of the Book! why disbelieve ye the signs of God? But God is
witness of your doings.

SAY: O people of the Book! why repel believers from the way of God? Ye fain
would make it crooked, and yet ye are its witnesses! But God is not
regardless of what ye do.

O believers! if ye obey some amongst those who have received the Scripture,
after your very Faith will they make you infidels!

But how can ye become infidels, when the signs of God are recited to you, and
his prophet is among you? Whoever holdeth fast by God, is already guided to a
straight path.

O ye believers! fear God as He deserveth to be feared! and die not till ye
have become Muslims.

And hold ye fast by the cord 35 of God, all of you, and break not loose from
it; and remember God's goodness towards you, how that when ye were enemies,
He united your hearts, and by his favour ye became brethren;

And when ye were on the brink of the pit of fire, he drew you back from it.
Thus God clearly sheweth you his signs that ye may be guided;

And that there may be among you a people who invite to the Good, and enjoin
the Just, and forbid the Wrong. These are they with whom it shall be well.

And be ye not like those who have formed divisions, and fallen to variance
after the clear proofs have come to them. These! a terrible chastisement doth
await them,

On THE DAY when faces shall turn white, and faces shall turn black! And as to
those whose faces shall have turned black ". . . .What! after your belief
have ye become infidels? Taste then the chastisement, for that ye have been
unbelievers."

And as to those whose faces shall have become white, they shall be within the
mercy of God: therein shall they abide for ever.

These are the signs of God: we recite them to thee in truth: And God willeth
not injustice to mankind.

Whatever is in the Heavens, and whatever is on the Earth, is God's. And to
God shall all things return.

Ye are the best folk that hath been raised up unto mankind. Ye enjoin the
Just, and ye forbid the Evil, and ye believe in God: And if the people of the
Book had believed, it had surely been better for them! Believers there are
among them, but most of them are perverse.

They will never inflict on you but a trifling damage; and if they do battle
with you, they shall turn their backs to you: then they shall not be
succoured.

Shame shall be stamped upon them36 wherever found, unless they ally them with
God and men! And the wrath of God will they incur, and poverty shall be
stamped upon them! This-for that they believed not in the signs of God, and
slew the prophets unjustly: This-because they rebelled, and became
transgressors.

Yet all are not alike: Among the people of the Book is an upright folk, who
recite the signs of God in the night-season, and adore:

They believe in God and in the latter day, and enjoin justice, and forbid
evil, and speed on in good works. These are of the righteous.

And of whatever good ye do, ye shall not be denied the meed. God knoweth
those who fear Him.

But as for the infidels, their wealth, and their children shall avail them
nothing against God. They shall be the inmates of the fire, to abide therein
eternally.

The alms which they bestow in this present life, are like a freezing wind,
which falleth upon and destroyeth the cornfields of a people who have been to
themselves unjust. God doeth them no injustice, but to themselves are they
unjust.

O ye who have believed! form not intimacies among others than yourselves.
They will not fail to corrupt you. They long for your ruin. Hatred hath
already shewn itself out of their mouths, but more grievous is what their
breasts conceal. The tokens thereof we have already made plain to you, if ye
will comprehend.

See now! ye love them, but they love not you. Ye believe the entire Book. And
when they meet you, they say, "We believe;" but when they are apart, they
bite their fingers' ends at you, out of wrath. SAY: "Die in your wrath!" God
truly knoweth the very recesses of your breasts.

If good befalleth you it grieveth them, and when ill lighteth on you, they
rejoice in it. But if ye be steadfast and fear God, their craft shall in no
way harm you. For God is round about their doings.

And remember when thou didst leave thy household at early morn, that thou
mightest prepare the faithful a camp for the war;37-God heard, knew it-

When two troops of you became full of anxious thoughts, and lost heart, and
when God became the protector of both! In God, then, let the faithful trust.

God had already succoured you at Bedr, when ye were the weaker! Fear God,
then, that ye may be thankful.

Then thou didst say to the faithful, "Is it not enough for you that your Lord
aideth you with three thousand angels sent down from on high?"

Aye: but ye if be steadfast and fear God, and the foe come upon you in hot
haste, your Lord will help you with five thousand angels in their
cognisances!38

This, as pure good tidings for you, did God appoint, that your hearts might
be assured-for only from God, the Mighty, the Wise, cometh the Victory-and
that He might cut off the uttermost part of those who believed not, or cast
them down so that they should be overthrown, defeated without resource.

It is none of thy concern whether He be turned unto them in kindness or
chastise them: for verily they are wrongful doers.

Whatever is in the Heavens and the Earth is God's! He forgiveth whom He will,
and whom He will, chastiseth: for God is Forgiving, Merciful.

O ye who believe! devour not usury, doubling it again and again! But fear
God, that ye may prosper.

And fear the fire which is prepared for them that believe not; and obey God
and the apostle, that ye may find mercy:

And vie in haste for pardon from your Lord, and a Paradise, vast as the
Heavens and the Earth, prepared for the God-fearing.

Who give alms, alike in prosperity and in success, and who master their
anger, and forgive others! God loveth the doers of good.

They who, after they have done a base deed or committed a wrong against their
own selves, remember God and implore forgiveness of their sins-and who will
forgive sins but God only?-and persevere not in what they have wittingly done
amiss.

As for these! Pardon from their Lord shall be their recompense, and gardens
'neath which the rivers flow; for ever shall they abide therein: And goodly
the reward of those who labour!

Already, before your time, have examples been made! Traverse the earth, then,
and see what hath been the end of those who treat prophets as liars.

This Koran is a manifest to man, and a guidance, and a warning to the God-
fearing!

And be not fainthearted, and be not sorrowful: For ye shall gain the upper
hand if ye be believers.39

If a wound hath befallen you, a wound like it hath already befallen others:
we alternate these days of successes and reverses among men, that God may
know those who have believed, and that He may take martyrs from among you,-
but God loveth not the wrongful doers-

And that God may test those who believe, and destroy the infidels.

Thought ye that ye should enter Paradise ere God had taken knowledge of those
among you who did valiantly, and of those who steadfastly endure?

Ye had desired death ere ye met it. But ye have now seen it-and ye have
beheld it-and fled from it!

Muhammad is no more than an apostle; other apostles have already passed away
before him: if he die, therefore,40 or be slain, will ye turn upon your
heels?41 But he who turneth on his heels shall not injure God at all: And God
will certainly reward the thankful!

No one can die except by God's permission, according to the Book that fixeth
the term of life.42 He who desireth the recompense of this world, we will
give him thereof; And he who desireth the recompense of the next life, we
will give him thereof! And we will certainly reward the thankful.

How many a prophet hath combated those who had with them many myriads! Yet
were they not daunted at what befel them on the path of God, nor were they
weakened, nor did they basely submit! God loveth those who endure with
steadfastness,

Nor said they more than this:43 "O our Lord! forgive us our sins and our
mistakes in this our work; and set our feet firm; and help us against the
unbelieving people." And God gave them the recompense of this world, and the
excellence of the recompense of the next. For God loveth the doers of what is
excellent.

O ye who have believed! if ye obey the infidels, they will cause you to turn
upon your heels,44 and ye will fall back into perdition:

But God is your liege lord, and He is the best of helpers.

We will cast a dread into hearts of the infidels because they have joined
gods with God without warranty sent down; their abode shall be the fire; and
wretched shall be the mansion of the evil doers.

Already had God made good to you His promise, when by His permission ye
destroyed your foes, until your courage failed you, and ye disputed about the
order,45 and disobeyed, after that the Prophet had brought you within view of
that for which ye longed.46

Some of you were for this world, and some for the next.47 Then, in order to
make trial of you, He turned you to flight from them,-yet hath He now
forgiven you; for all-bounteous is God to the faithful-

When ye came up the height48 and took no heed of any one, while the Prophet
in your rear was calling you to the fight! God hath rewarded you with trouble
upon trouble, that ye might learn not to be chagrined at your loss of booty,
or at what befel you! God is acquainted with your actions.

Then after the trouble God sent down security upon you. Slumber fell upon a
part of you: as to the other part-their own passions stirred them up to think
unjustly of God with thoughts of ignorance! They said-What gain we by this
affair? SAY: Verily the affair resteth wholly with God. They hid in their
minds what they did not speak out to thee, saying, "Were we to have gained
aught in this affair, none of us had been slain at this place." SAY: Had ye
remained in your homes, they who were decreed to be slain would have gone
forth to the places where they lie:-in order that God might make trial of
what was in your breasts, and might discover what was in your hearts, for God
knoweth the very secrets of the breast.

Of a truth it was Satan alone who caused those of you to fail in duty who
turned back on the day when the hosts met, for some of their doings! But now
hath God pardoned them; For God is Forgiving, Gracious.

O ye who believe! be not like the infidels, who said of their brethren when
they had travelled by land or had gone forth to war, "Had they kept with us,
they had not died, and had not been slain!" God purposed that this affair
should cause them heart sorrow! God maketh alive and killeth; and God
beholdeth your actions.

And if ye shall be slain or die on the path of God, then pardon from God and
mercy is better than all your amassings;

For if ye die or be slain, verily unto God shall ye be gathered.

Of the mercy of God thou hast spoken to them in gentle terms. Hadst thou been
severe and harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from thee. Therefore,
forgive and ask for pardon for them, and consult them in the affair of war,
and when thou art resolved, then put thou thy trust in God, for God loveth
those who trust in Him.

If God help you, none shall overcome you; but if He abandon you, who is he
that shall help you when He is gone? In God, then, let the faithful trust.

It is not the Prophet who will defraud you;49-But he who shall defraud, shall
come forth with his defraudings on the day of the resurrection: then shall
every soul be paid what it hath merited, and they shall not be treated with
injustice.

Shall he who hath followed the good pleasure of God be as he who hath brought
on himself wrath from God, and whose abode shall be Hell? and wretched the
journey thither!

There are varying grades with God: and God beholdeth what ye do.

Now hath God been gracious to the faithful, when he raised up among them an
apostle out of their own people, to rehearse unto them his signs, and to
cleanse them, and to give them knowledge of the Book and of Wisdom: for
before they were in manifest error.

When a reverse hath befallen you,50 the like of which ye had before
inflicted, say ye, "Whence is this?" SAY: It is from yourselves. For God hath
power over all things.

And that which befel you on the day when the armies met, was certainly by the
will of God, and that he might know the faithful, and that he might know the
hypocrites! And when the word was "Advance, fight on the path of God, or
drive back the foe,"-they said, "Had we known how to fight, we would have
followed you." Nearer were some of them on that day to unbelief, than to
faith:

They said with their lips what was not in their hearts! But God knew what
they concealed,

Who said of their brethren while themselves sat at home,

"Had they obeyed us, they had not been slain." SAY: Keep back death from
yourselves if ye speak truth.

And repute not those slain on God's path to be dead.51 Nay, alive with their
Lord, are they richly sustained;

Rejoicing in what God of his bounty hath vouchsafed them, filled with joy for
those who follow after them, but have not yet overtaken them, that on them
nor fear shall come, nor grief;

Filled with joy at the favours of God, and at his bounty: and that God
suffereth not the reward of the faithful to perish.

As to those who after the reverse52 which befel them, respond to God and the
Apostle-such of them as do good works and fear God, shall have a great
reward:

Who, when men said to them, "Now are the Meccans mustering against you;
therefore fear them!" it only increased their faith, and they said, "Our
sufficiency is God, and He is an excellent protector."

They returned, therefore, with the favour of God, enriched by Him, and
untouched by harm; and they followed what was well pleasing to God. And God
is of great Munificence.

Only would that Satan53 instil the fear of his adherents: Fear them not, but
fear me if ye are believers.

Let not those who vie in haste after infidelity grieve thee: Verily not one
whit shall they injure God! God will refuse them all part in the life to
come: a severe chastisement shall be their lot.

They truly who purchase infidelity at the price of their faith, shall not
injure God one whit! and a grievous chastisement shall be their lot.

Let not the infidels deem that the length of days we give them is good for
them! We only give them length of days that they may increase their sins! and
a shameful chastisement shall be their lot.

It is not in God to leave the faithful in the State in which they are, until
he sever the bad from the good:

Nor is God minded to lay open the secret things to you, but God chooseth whom
he will of his apostles to know them.54 Believe, therefore, in God and his
apostles: and if ye believe and fear God, a great reward awaiteth you.

And let not those who are niggard of what God hath vouchsafed them in his
bounty, think that this will be good for them-Nay, it will be bad for them-

That of which they have been niggard shall be their collar on the day of the
resurrection. God's, the heritage of the Heavens and of the Earth! And God is
well-informed of all ye do.

Now hath God heard the saying of those who said: "Aye, God is poor and we are
rich."55 We will surely write down their sayings, and their unjust slaughter
of the prophets; and and we will say, "Taste ye the torment of the burning.

This, for what your hands have sent before you; and because God will not
inflict a wrong upon his servants!"

To those who say, "Verily, God hath enjoined us that we are not to credit an
apostle until he present us a sacrifice which fire out of Heaven shall
devour,"

SAY: Already have apostles before me come to you with miracles, and with that
of which ye speak. Wherefore slew ye them? Tell me, if ye are men of truth.

And if they treat thee as a liar, then verily apostles have been treated as
liars before thee, though they came with clear proofs of their mission, and
with Scriptures, and with the light-giving Book.

Every soul shall taste of death: and ye shall only receive your recompenses
on the day of resurrection. And whoso shall scape the fire, and be brought
into Paradise, shall be happy. And the life of this world is but a cheating
fruition!

Ye shall assuredly be tried in your possessions and in yourselves. And many
hurtful things shall ye assuredly hear from those to whom the Scriptures were
given before you, and from those who join other gods with God. But if ye be
steadfast, and fear God this verily is needed in the affairs of life.

Moreover, when God entered into a convenant with those to whom the Scriptures
had been given, and said, "Ye shall surely make it known to mankind and not
hide it," they cast it behind their backs, and sold it for a sorry price! But
vile is that for which they have sold it.

Suppose not that they who rejoice in what they have brought to pass, and love
to be praised for what they have not done56-suppose not they shall escape the
chastisement. An afflictive chastisement doth await them,

For the Kingdom of the Heavens and the Earth is God's, and God hath power
over all things.

Verily, in the creation of the Heavens and of the Earth, and in the
succession of the night and of the day, are signs for men of understanding
heart;

Who standing, and sitting, and reclining, bear God in mind, and muse on the
creation of the Heavens and of the Earth. "O our Lord!" say they, "thou hast
not created this in vain. No. Glory be to Thee! Keep us, then, from the
torment of the fire.

O our Lord! surely thou wilt put him to shame whom thou shalt cause to enter
into the Fire, and the wrong-doers shall have none to help them.

O our Lord! we have indeed heard the voice of one that called. He called us
to the faith-¬íBelieve on your Lord¬í-and we have believed.

O our Lord! forgive us then our sin, and hide away from us our evil deeds,
and cause us to die with the righteous.

O our Lord! and give us what thou hast promised us by thine apostles, and put
us not to shame on the day of the resurrection. Verily, Thou wilt not fail
thy promise."

And their Lord answereth them, "I will not suffer the work of him among you
that worketh, whether of male or female, to be lost. The one of you is the
issue of the other.57

And they who have fled their country and quitted their homes and suffered in
my cause, and have fought and fallen, I will blot out their sins from them,
and I will bring them into gardens beneath which the streams do flow."

A recompense from God! and God! with His is the perfection of recompense!

Let not prosperity in the land58 on the part of those who believe not,
deceive thee. 'Tis but a brief enjoyment! Then shall Hell be their abode; and
wretched the bed!

But as to those who fear their Lord-for them are the gardens 'neath which the
rivers flow: therein shall they abide for aye. Such their reception with God-
and that which is with God is best for the righteous.

Among the people of the Book are those who believe in God, and in what He
hath sent down to you, and in what He hath sent down to them, humbling
themselves before God. They barter not the signs of God for a mean price.

These! their recompense awaiteth them with their Lord: aye! God is swift to
take account.

O ye who believe! be patient, and vie in patience, and be firm, and fear God,
that it may be well with you.


_______________________

1 Verses 1-87 probably belong to the period between the battle of Bedr and
Hej. 6.-Muhammad supposed Imran or Amran to be the father of the Virgin Mary
(Sura [cix.] lxvi. 12)-Mary and Elizabeth to be sisters; who, with Jesus,
John, and Zacharias, make up the family of Imran. It is difficult to avoid
the conclusion that Muhammad is guilty of the anachronism of confounding
Miriam with the Virgin Mary. On the other hand is the difficulty of
conceiving that as the sequence of time and fact is observed with tolerable
accuracy in regard to the main features of Jewish and Christian History, he
should have fallen into so serious an error, or have so inadvertently
adopted, as Mr. Muir supposes, the phraseology of his Jewish informants
(amongst whom the only well-known Mary (Miriam) was the daughter of Imran and
the sister of Moses) as to have overlooked the discrepancy in their
respective dates. But it is possible that Muhammad believed, as some Muslim
writers assert, that Miriam's soul and body were miraculously preserved till
the time of Jesus in order to become Mary his mother. Certainly the
Talmudists fabled that the Angel of Death and the worm of corruption had no
power over Miriam. Comp. Babha Bathra, 17. Jos. Ant. iv. 4, 6.

2 See note, p. 32.

3 See Sura xxi. 49, p. 154, n.

4 Lit. mother.

5 In the battle of Bedr, Muhammad, with 319 followers routed 1000 Meccans,
A.H. 2.

6 That is, knowledge, or revelation, became the cause of disputings.

7 That is, will ye receive Islam? The Ummiin, or common folk, the heathen
Arabians destitute of Revelation. In the earliest extant biography of
Muhammad by Ibn Ishaq, we find these words addressed by Zaid, previous to the
assumption of the prophetic office by Muhammad, to the Koreisch. This is one
of the facts which shew that the way was to a great extent prepared for
Islam. This whole address of Zaid's-which contains not less than six passages
afterwards repeated in the Koran-may be seen in Dr. Sprenger's Life of M. p.
42. The instances of others who had learned to disbelieve in idolatry, and
had either become Jews or Christians, or held their minds in suspense, might
easily be multiplied. Comp. Sharastani, p. 437. Masudi, ch. 6.

8 The King of the Kingdom, or, Lord of Might. This verse and the following
are either fragments of some lost Sura, or belonging to one of the Meccan
Suras. At any rate, they are misplaced, interrupting as they do the
connection of the preceding and subsequent verses.

9 The wife of Imran is Hannah or Anne. Comp. Protev. Jac. iv. [greek text].-
Evang. de Nat. Mar. 1: Voverunt tamen (Mari¬ë parentes) si forte donaret eis
Deus sobolem, eam se Dni servitio mancipaturos.-Although Muhammad had no
direct access to the Apocryphal Gospels, yet these may have influenced, or at
any rate, contained much in common with, the ordinary traditions of S. Syria.
And of this, the Immaculate Conception of the B. V. Mary, supposed by Gibbon
(ch. 50) to have been "borrowed from the Koran," probably formed a part.

10 That is, the female could not become a priest.

11 See note, p. 114.

12 According to a tradition of Muhammad every new-born child is touched by
Satan, with the exception of Mary and her Son, between whom and Satan God
interposed a veil. (Djelal. Beidh.) Hence this passage may imply the
Immaculate Conception of the B. V. Mary. See v. 37 below.

13 Evang. de Nat. Mar. 7: Quotidie ab angelis frequentabatur, quotidie divin√¢
visione fruebatur, queam a malis omnibus custodiebat et bonis omnibus
redundare faciebat. Protev. Jac. 8: [greek text]. Hist. Nativ. Mar. 6:
Quotidie esc√¢, quam de manu angeli accipiebat, ips√¢ tantum reficiebatur.

14 The word rendered descendants is a collective noun. Gerock (p. 20) thinks
that Zacharias' prayer was not for a son of his own, but for an adopted son-
as, for instance, the future husband of Mary who might become his heir, and
hence accounts for his surprise and unbelief at the announcement of John.

15 Lit. chamber. By this may be meant an [greek text] of the Temple Comp.
Luke i. 21.

16 Luke i. 28.

17 Hist. de Nativ. Mar. 6: Abierunt simul Joachim et Anna uxor ejus ad
templum domini, et . . . tradiderunt . . . Mariam in contubernio virginum qu¬ë
die noctuque in Dei laudibus manebant.

18 These reeds, say the commentators, were written over with passages from
the law, and cast into Jordan. That of Zacharias alone swam, and was the
token that the charge of Mary was to devolve on him. Others render, their
divining arrows. See a detailed account of the manner in which this matter
was settled by [greek text], virgae, in Protev. Jac. Thilo. p. 204. Hist.
Nat. Mar. ib. p. 359 sqq.

19 Ar. El-Mesich Isa ben Mariam, illustrious in this world as a Prophet, in
the next as an Intercessor. Beidh.

20 Evang. Thom¬ë, ch. 2 (Thilo. p. 281) and Evang. Infantiƒá Arab. ch. 36, 46.
(Thilo. p. 111, 123.)

20-21a (0) Addenda: Lit. who my helpers unto God?  i.e., helpers of his
religion (Beidh).  If Muhammad had become, by any means, acquainted with the
use of the ƒÜth. radeh, helper or disciple, we have herein a probable
interpretation of this passage, as well as of the word Ansar.

21 See Sura [cxiv.] v. 111.

22 Muhammad probably believed that God took the dead body of Jesus to Heaven-
for three hours according to some-while the Jews crucified a man who
resembled him. Sura [c.] iv. 156. The word motewaffika (comp. Sura [lxxx.]
xxxix. 156) means, in speaking of God, to cause to die, take to himself. It
would also seem from Sura [lviii.] xix. 34, that Muhammad supposed Jesus to
have died a natural death, though it is nowhere said how long he continued in
that state. The Muhammadans believe that Jesus on his return to earth at the
end of the world will slay the Antichrist, die, and be raised again. A vacant
place is reserved for his body in the Prophet's tomb at Medina. See Lieut.
Burton's Pilgrimage, vol. ii.

23 Lit. verily the similitude or analogy of Isa is as the similitude or
analogy of Adam, i.e. neither of them had a human father.

24 This refers to an embassy from the Christians in Nedjran in Arabia, with
their Bishop, Abu Hareth, at their head, to Muhammad at Medina, who had now
acquired political power. The embassy declined to be parties to the strange
mode of settling the dispute here proposed, but consented to pay tribute on
condition of not being molested in their religion or lands.

25 If this be not a mere figure of speech, it must mean let us call over and
curse the names, the persons being at a distance.

26 As the Christians do their Bishops and Priests.

27 Whether he were a Jew or Christian.

28 About Moses and Jesus, and their respective faiths.

29 See Sura xvi. 121, p. 209, note.

30 Muhammad insinuates that the claim to be equal with God could never have
been made by Jesus himself, but by his followers, in ignorance of the
Scriptures and of his true nature.

31 That is, to call them rabb-a title due only to God.

32 Assembled on Mount Sinai. Compare the Jewish legend, that all the
prophets, even those who were not yet born, were present on Mount Sinai, when
God gave the law to Moses. See Shemoth Rabba. Parashah 28, according to
which, not only the Prophets but the Rabbis of every generation, were present
at the giving of the Law.

33 Becca, place of crowding, i.e. Mecca. This sentence, together with other
Suras-the Cave, Mary, Imran, Repentance, T, H, are woven into the Kiswah or
covering of the Caaba, which is renewed annually.

34 The Makam Ibrahim (praying place of Abraham) is a small building supported
by six pillars about 8 ft. high, four of which are surrounded from top to
bottom by a fine iron railing, while they leave the space between the two
hind pillars open; within the railing is a frame about 5 ft. square, said to
contain the sacred stone on which Ibrahim stood when he built the Caaba.
Burckhardt. Lieut. Burton (Pilgrimage, iii. 336) says that as the Arab
tradition speaks clearly and consistently as to the fact of Abraham having
visited Mecca to build the Caaba, it may be considered an open question. Thus
also Dr. G. W. Freytag (Einl.).

35 The Koran.

36 Or, they are smitten with. Sale. S'etendra comme une tente. Kas.

37 This probably refers to the battle of Ohod.

38 The Arabic word occurs at verse 13 of horses as known by certain marks. So
here these angels would be known by their accoutrements, etc.

39 This and the following verses to 154 were probably revealed shortly after
the reverse of Ohod.

40 This verse and xxxix. 31 (p.257) were recited at Muhammad's death by Abu
Bekr, in order to convince Omar and the other Muslims of the possibility of
that event. It has been supposed that these passages were invented by Abu
Bekr on this occasion, and inserted into the Koran. But this is more than
doubtful. See N√∂ldeke, pp. 199-201.

41 That is, return to idolatry. A report had been spread in the battle of
Ohod that Muhammad had been slain.

42 Lit. according to a writing (i.e. of God) definite. The Rabbins also teach
(Com. Tract. Rosch. Haschanah) that there are books in which God has written
down the lifetime of every individual. Lit. No soul can die.

43 Lit. and their saying was no other than that they said.

44 To relapse into infidelity. The Koreisch attempted to seduce the Muslims
to renounce their faith after the battle of Ohod.

45 The command to abstain from taking the spoils. This disobedience turned
the scale of victory against the Muslims.

46 Victory and plunder.

47 Some took to flight, others stood firm, and were not careful of their
lives.

48 That is, in confused rout.

49 Muhammad had been accused of having secretly appropriated a portion of the
spoil.

50 At Ohod.

51 See Sura [xci.] ii. 149.

52  At Ohod; lit. wound.

53 Lit. that Satan. Said to refer to Noaim, or Abu Sofian, the leader of the
Koreisch.

54 This is an answer to the taunt that Muhammad could not distinguish true
believers from hypocrites.

55 This was the taunt of the Jews of the tribe of Kainoka, when Muhammad
demanded tribute of them in the name of God.

56 That is, who rejoice in their successful corruptions of their own sacred
books, especially the testimony of Moses to Muhammad, and in their own
fancied righteousness. Thus some of the commentators.

57 Lit. some of you are from others. These words were occasioned by one of
the Prophet's wives having told him that God often praised the men, but not
the women, who had fled their country for the faith. Beidh.

58 Lit. their movements, their comings and goings. Hence, the success of the
Meccans in their trading journeys. This may point to the comparative freedom
from trade and general independence of the Meccans after the affair at Ohod.


SURA LXI.-BATTLE ARRAY [XCVIII.]

MEDINA.-14 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ALL that is in the Heavens and all that is on the Earth praiseth God. He is
the Mighty, the Wise!

Believers! why profess ye that which ye practise not?1

Most hateful is it to God that ye say that which ye do not.

Verily God loveth those who, as though they were a solid wall, do battle for
his cause in serried lines!

And bear in mind when Moses said to his people, "Why grieve ye me, O my
people, when ye know that I am God's apostle unto you?" And when they went
astray, God led their hearts astray; for God guideth not a perverse people:

And remember when Jesus the son of Mary said, "O children of Israel! of a
truth I am God's apostle to you to confirm the law which was given before me,
and to announce an apostle that shall come after me whose name shall be
Ahmad!"2 But when he (Ahmad) presented himself with clear proofs of his
mission, they said, "This is manifest sorcery!"

But who more impious than he who when called to Islam deviseth a falsehood
concerning God? God guideth not the wicked!

Fain would they put out the light of God with their mouths! but though the
Infidels hate it, God will perfect his light.

He it is who hath sent his apostle with guidance and the religion of truth,
that, though they hate it who join other gods with God, He may make it
victorious over every other religion.

O ye who believe! shall I shew you a merchandise that shall deliver you from
the sore torment?

Believe in God and his apostle, and do valiantly in the cause of God with
your wealth and with your persons! This, did ye but know it, will be best for
you.

Your sins will He forgive you, and He will bring you into gardens beneath
whose shades the rivers flow-into charming abodes in the gardens of Eden:
This shall be the great bliss.-

And other things which ye desire will he bestow, Help from God and speedy
conquest!3 Bear thou these tidings to the faithful.

O ye who believe! be helpers (ansars) of God; as said Jesus the son of Mary
to his apostles, "Who will come to the help of God?" "We," said the apostles,
"will be helpers of God." And a part of the children of Israel believed, and
a part believed not. But to those who believed gave we the upperhand over
their foes, and soon did they prove victorious.


_______________________

1 Addressed to the Muslims who had turned their backs to the enemy at Ohod.

2 Muhammad had no doubt heard that Jesus had promised a Paracletos, John xvi.
7. This title, understood by him, probably from the similarity of sound, as
equivalent to Periclytos, he applied to himself with reference to his own
name Muhammad (i.e. praised, glorified) from the same root and of the same
meaning as Ahmad, also one of the Prophet's names. It may be here remarked
that the name Muhammad, if pronounced Muhammed, "might be understood by an
Arab in an active instead of a passive sense." (Lane, Kor. p. 52.) Other
passages of Scripture understood by Muslims of their Prophet are Deut.
xxxiii. 2, where Paran is said to mean Islam; Isai. xxi. 6, where the "rider
on the ass" is Jesus, the "rider on the camel" Muhammad; Matt. xx. 1-16,
where the morning, noon, and even are Judaism, Christianity, and Islam; John
iv. 21; 1 John iv. 2, 3, where Muhammad is said to be "the spirit that is of
God," because he proclaimed that Jesus was a true man and not God.

3 If this allude to a meditated attack on the Banu Nadir (see Sura [cii.]
lix.) we have a clue to the probable date of the Sura. The promise, however,
may be general. But the tone of verse 9 evidently points to a period when, as
at Medina, the prospects of Islam were becoming hopeful.


SURA LVII.-IRON [XCIX.]

MEDINA.1-29 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ALL that is in the Heavens and in the Earth praiseth God, and He is the
Mighty, the Wise!

His the Kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth; He maketh alive and killeth;
and He hath power over all things!

He is the first and the last; the Seen and the Hidden;2 and He knoweth all
things!

It is He who in six days created the Heavens and the Earth, then ascended His
throne. He knoweth that which entereth the earth, and that which goeth forth
from it, and what cometh down from Heaven, and what mounteth up to it; and
wherever ye are, He is with you; and God beholdeth all your actions!

His the kingdom of the Heavens and the Earth; and to God shall all things
return!

He causeth the night to pass into the day, and He causeth the day to pass
into the night: and He knoweth the very secrets of the bosom!

Believe in God and his apostle, and bestow in alms of that whereof God hath
made you heirs: for whoever among you believe and give alms-their's shall be
a great recompense.

What hath come to you that ye believe not in God, although the apostle
exhorteth you to believe in your Lord, and He hath accepted your alliance-if
ye are true believers?

He it is who hath sent down clear tokens upon His servant, that He may bring
you out of darkness into light; and truly, Kind, Merciful to you is God.

And what hath come to you that ye expend not for the cause of God? since the
heritage of the Heavens and of the Earth is God's only! Those among you who
contributed before the victory, and fought, shall be differently treated from
certain others among you! Such shall have a nobler grade than those who
contributed and fought after it. But a goodly recompense hath God promised to
all; and God is fully informed of your actions.

Who is he that will lend a generous loan to God? So will He double it to him,
and he shall have a noble reward.

One day thou shalt see the believers, men and women, with their light running
before them, and on their right hand.3 The angels shall say to them, "Good
tidings for you this day of gardens beneath whose shades the rivers flow, in
which ye shall abide for ever!" This the great bliss!

On that day the hypocrites, both men and women, shall say to those who
believe, "Tarry for us, that we may kindle our light at yours." It shall be
said, "Return ye back, and seek light for yourselves." But between them shall
be set a wall with a gateway, within which shall be the Mercy, and in front,
without it, the Torment. They shall cry to them, "Were we not with you?" They
shall say, "Yes! but ye led yourselves into temptation, and ye delayed, and
ye doubted, and the good things ye craved deceived you, till the doom of God
arrived:-and the deceiver deceived you in regard to God."

On that day, therefore, no ransom shall be taken from you or from those who
believe not:-your abode the fire!-This shall be your master!4 and wretched
the journey thither!

Hath not the time come, for those who believe, to humble their hearts at the
warning of God and at the truth which he hath sent down? and that they be not
as those to whom the Scriptures were given heretofore, whose lifetime was
prolonged, but whose hearts were hardened, and many of them were perverse?

Know that God quickeneth the earth after its death! Now have we made these
signs clear to you, that ye may understand.

Verily, they who give alms, both men and women, and they who lend a generous
loan to God,-doubled shall it be to them-and they shall have a noble
recompense.

And they who believed in God and his apostle are the men of truth, and the
witnesses in the presence of their Lord;5 They shall have their recompense
and their light: But as for the infidels, and those who give the lie to our
signs, these shall be the inmates of Hell.

Know ye that this world's life is only a sport, and pastime, and show, and a
cause of vainglory among you! And the multiplying of riches and children is
like the plants which spring up after rain-Their growth rejoiceth the
husband-man; then they wither away, and thou seest them all yellow; then they
become stubble. And in the next life is a severe chastisement,

Or else pardon from God and His satisfaction: and this world's life is but a
cheating fruition.6

Vie in hasting after pardon from your Lord, and Paradise-whose outspread is
as the outspread of the Heaven and of the Earth: Prepared is it for those who
believe in God and His apostles: Such is the bounty of God: to whom He will
He giveth it: and of immense bounty is God!

No mischance chanceth either on earth or in your own persons, but ere we
created them, it was in the Book;7-for easy is this to God-

Lest ye distress yourselves if good things escape you, and be over joyous for
what falleth to your share. God loveth not the presumptuous, the boaster,

Who are covetous themselves and incite others to covetousness. But whose
turneth away from almsgiving-Ah! God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.

We have sent our apostles with the clear tokens, and we have caused the Book
and the balance8 to descend with them, that men might observe fairness. And
we have sent down IRON. Dire evil9 resideth in it, as well as advantage, to
mankind! God would know who will assist Him and his apostle in secret.
Verily, God is Powerful, Strong.

And of old sent we Noah and Abraham, and on their seed conferred the gift of
prophecy, and the Book; and some of them we guided aright; but many were evil
doers.

Then we caused our apostles to follow in their footsteps; and we caused Jesus
the son of Mary to follow them; and we gave him the Evangel,10 and we put
into the hearts of those who followed him kindness and compassion: but as to
the monastic life, they invented it themselves. The desire only of pleasing
God did we prescribe to them, and this they observed not as it ought to have
been observed: but to such of them as believed gave we their reward, though
many of them were perverse.

O ye who believe! fear God and believe in his apostle: two portions of his
mercy will He give you. He will bestow on you light to walk in, and He will
forgive you: for God is Forgiving, Merciful;

That the people of the Book may know that they have no control over aught of
the favours of God, and that these gifts of grace11 are in the hands of God,
and that He vouchsafeth them to whom he will; for God is of immense bounty.


_______________________

1 The general tone of this Sura shews it to have been revealed at Medina, and
from verse 22 it may be inferred that its true date lies between the battle
of Ohod and the battle of the Ditch.

2 Lit. the exterior and the interior.

3 To guide them on their route to paradise.

4 Patronus. Mar. Beschutzer. Ullm. Or, what ye have deserved.

5 Against the infidels.

6 Supellex deceptionis. Mar.

7 Of our eternal decrees.

8 Brought by Gabriel to Noah, who imparted its use to his posterity. So say
the commentators. But the expression seems rather to be figurative. Comp.
Sura lv. 6, p. 74.

9 Or, mighty warlike strength, but the antithesis requires the rendering
given in the text. Comp. Gen. iv. 22, and Michna Tr. Aboth, 5, 9.

10 We are not to understand by the word Evangel the actual volume of the New
Testament, or any one of its component parts, but rather the revelation made
to Jesus by God himself, which Muhammad may have imagined to have been
committed to writing subsequently, in the same way as his own Koran.

11 The word in the original is the same for favours, gifts of grace, bounty.
The reference is to the gift of prophecy (Beidh.) mentioned verse 27.


SURA IV.-WOMEN1 [C.]

MEDINA.-175 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O MEN! fear your Lord, who hath created you of one man (nafs, soul), and of
him created his wife, and from these twain hath spread abroad so many men and
WOMEN. And fear ye God, in whose name ye ask mutual favours,-and reverence
the wombs that bare you. Verily is God watching over you!

And give to the orphans their property; substitute not worthless things of
your own for their valuable ones, and devour not their property after adding
it to your own; for this is a great crime.

And if ye are apprehensive that ye shall not deal fairly with orphans, then,
of other women who seem good in your eyes, marry but two, or three, or four;2
and if ye still fear that ye shall not act equitably, then one only; or the
slaves whom ye have acquired: this will make justice on your part easier.
Give women their dowry freely; but if of themselves they give up aught
thereof to you, then enjoy it as convenient, and profitable:

And entrust not to the incapable the substance which God hath placed with you
for their support; but maintain them therewith, and clothe them, and speak to
them with kindly speech.

And make trial of orphans until they reach the age of marriage; and if ye
perceive in them a sound judgment, then hand over their substance to them;
but consume ye it not wastefully, or by hastily entrusting it to them;

Because they are growing up. And let the rich guardian not even touch it; and
let him who is poor use it for his support (eat of it) with discretion.

And when ye make over their substance to them, then take witnesses in their
presence: God also maketh a sufficient account.

Men ought to have a part of what their parents and kindred leave; and women3
a part of what their parents and kindred leave: whether it be little or much,
let them have a stated portion.

And when they who are of kin are present at the division, and the orphans and
the poor, let them too have a share; and speak to them with kindly speech.

And let those be afraid to wrong the orphans, who, should they leave behind
them weakly offspring, would be solicitous on their account. Let them,
therefore, fear God, and let them propose what is right.

Verily they who swallow the substance of the orphan wrongfully, shall swallow
down only fire into their bellies, and shall burn in the flame!

With regard to your children, God commandeth you to give the male the portion
of two females; and if they be females more than two, then they shall have
two-thirds of that which their father hath left: but if she be an only
daughter, she shall have the half; and the father and mother of the deceased
shall each of them have a sixth part of what he hath left, if he have a
child; but if he have no child, and his parents be his heirs, then his mother
shall have the third: and if he have brethren, his mother shall have the
sixth, after paying the bequests he shall have bequeathed, and his debts. As
to your fathers, or your children, ye know not which of them is the most
advantageous to you. This is the law of God. Verily, God is Knowing, Wise!

Half of what your wives leave shall be your's, if they have no issue; but if
they have issue, then a fourth of what they leave shall be your's, after
paying the bequests they shall bequeath, and debts.

And your wives shall have a fourth part of what ye leave, if ye have no
issue; but if ye have issue, then they shall have an eighth part of what ye
leave, after paying the bequests ye shall bequeath, and debts.

If a man or a woman make a distant relation their heir, and he or she have a
brother or a sister, each of these two shall have a sixth; but if there are
more than this, then shall they be sharers in a third, after payment of the
bequests he shall have bequeathed, and debts,

Without loss to any one. This is the ordinance of God, and God is Knowing,
Gracious!

These are the precepts of God; and whoso obeyeth God and his prophet, him
shall God bring into gardens beneath whose shades the rivers flow, therein to
abide for ever: and this, the great blessedness!

And whoso shall rebel against God and his apostle, and shall break His
bounds, him shall God place in the fire to abide therein for ever; and his
shall be a shameful torment.

If any of your women be guilty of whoredom, then bring four witnesses against
them from among yourselves; and if they bear witness to the fact, shut them
up within their houses till death release them,4 or God make some way for
them.

And if two men among you commit the same crime, then punish them both; but if
they turn and amend, then let them be: for God is He who turneth, Merciful!

With God himself will the repentance of those who have done evil ignorantly,
and then turn speedily unto Him, be accepted. These! God will turn unto
them:for God is Knowing, Wise!

But no place of repentance shall there be for those who do evil, until, when
death is close to one of them, he saith, "Now verily am I turned to God;" nor
to those who die unbelievers. These! we have made ready for them a grievous
torment!

O believers! it is not allowed you to be heirs of your wives against their
will; nor to hinder them from marrying, in order to take from them part of
the dowry you had given them, unless they have been guilty of undoubted
lewdness; but associate kindly with them: for if ye are estranged from them,
haply ye are estranged from that in which God hath placed abundant good.

And if ye be desirous to exchange one wife for another, and have given one of
them a talent, make no deduction from it. Would ye take it by slandering her,
and with manifest wrong?

How, moreover, could ye take it, when one of you hath gone in unto the other,
and they have received from you a strict bond of union?

And marry not women whom your fathers have married: for this is a shame, and
hateful, and an evil way: though what is past5 may be allowed.

Forbidden to you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your sisters, and
your aunts, both on the father and mother's side, and your nieces on the
brother and sister's side, and your foster-mothers, and your foster-sisters,
and the mothers of your wives, and your step-daughters who are your wards,
born of your wives to whom ye have gone in: (but if ye have not gone in unto
them, it shall be no sin in you to marry them;) and the wives of your sons
who proceed out of your loins; and ye may not have two sisters; except where
it is already done. Verily, God is Indulgent, Merciful!

Forbidden to you also are married women, except those who are in your hands
as slaves: This is the law of God for you. And it is allowed you, beside
this, to seek out wives by means of your wealth, with modest conduct, and
without fornication. And give those with whom ye have cohabited their dowry.
This is the law. But it shall be no crime in you to make agreements over and
above the law. Verily, God is Knowing, Wise!

And whoever of you is not rich enough to marry free believing women, then let
him marry such of your believing maidens as have fallen into your hands as
slaves; God well knoweth your faith. Ye are sprung the one from the other.
Marry them, then, with the leave of their masters, and give them a fair
dower: but let them be chaste and free from fornication, and not entertainers
of lovers.

If after marriage they commit adultery, then inflict upon them half the
penalty enacted for free married women. This law is for him among you who is
afraid of doing wrong:6 but if ye abstain,7 it will be better for you. And
God is Lenient, Merciful.

God desireth to make this known to you, and to guide you into the ways of
those who have been before you, and to turn Him unto you in mercy. And God is
Knowing, Wise!

God desireth thus to turn him unto you: but they who follow their own lusts,
desire that with great swerving should ye swerve! God desireth to make your
burden light: for man hath been created weak.

O believers! devour not each other's substance in mutual frivolities;8 unless
there be a trafficking among you by your own consent: and commit not
suicide:-of a truth God is merciful to you.

And whoever shall do this maliciously and wrongfully, we will in the end cast
him into the fire; for this is easy with God.

If ye avoid the great sins which ye are forbidden, we will blot out your
faults, and we will cause you to enter Paradise with honourable entry.

Covet not the gifts by which God hath raised some of you above others. The
men shall have a portion according to their deserts, and the women a portion
according to their deserts. Of God, therefore, ask his gifts. Verily, God
hath knowledge of all things.

To every one have we appointed kindred, as heirs of what parents and
relatives, and those with whom ye have joined right hands in contract, leave.
Give therefore, to each their portion. Verily, God witnesseth all things.

Men are superior to women on account of the qualities with which God hath
gifted the one above the other, and on account of the outlay they make from
their substance for them. Virtuous women are obedient, careful, during the
husband's absence, because God hath of them been careful.9 But chide those
for whose refractoriness ye have cause to fear; remove them into beds apart,
and scourage them: but if they are obedient to you, then seek not occasion
against them: verily, God is High, Great!

And if ye fear a breach between man and wife, then send a judge chosen from
his family, and a judge chosen from her family: if they are desirous of
agreement, God will effect a reconciliation between them; verily, God is
knowing, apprised of all!

Worship God, and join not aught with Him in worship. Be good to parents,10
and to kindred, and to orphans, and to the poor, and to a neighbour, whether
kinsman or new-comer, and to a fellow traveller, and to the wayfarer, and to
the slaves whom your right hands hold; verily, God loveth not the proud, the
vain boaster,

Who are niggardly themselves, and bid others be niggards, and hide away what
God of his bounty hath given them. We have made ready a shameful chastisement
for the unbelievers,

And for those who bestow their substance in alms to be seen of men, and
believe not in God and in the last day. Whoever hath Satan for his companion,
an evil companion hath he!

But what blessedness would be theirs, if they should believe in God and in
the last day, and bestow alms out of what God hath vouchsafed them; for God
taketh knowledge of them!

God truly will not wrong any one of the weight of a mote; and if there be any
good deed, he will repay it doubly; and from his presence shall be given a
great recompense.

How! when we shall bring up against them witnesses from all peoples, and when
we shall bring thee up as witness against these? On that day they who were
Infidels and rebelled against the prophet, shall wish that the earth were
levelled with them! But nothing shall they hide from God.

O ye true believers,11 come not to prayer when ye are drunken, but wait till
ye can understand what ye utter; nor when ye are polluted, unless ye be
travelling on the road, until ye have washed you. If ye be sick, or on a
journey, or have come from the unclean place, or have touched a woman, and ye
find not water, then rub pure sand, and bathe your face and your hands with
it: verily, God is Lenient, Merciful.

Hast thou not remarked those12 to whom a part of the Scriptures hath been
given? Vendors are they of error, and are desirous that ye go astray from the
way. But God knoweth your enemies; and God is a sufficient patron, and God is
a sufficient helper!

Among the Jews are those who displace the words of their Scriptures, and say,
"We have heard, and we have not obeyed. Hear thou, but as one that heareth
not; and LOOK AT US;"13 perplexing with their tongues, and wounding the Faith
by their revilings.

But if they would say, "We have heard, and we obey; hear thou, and REGARD
US;" it were better for them, and more right. But God hath cursed them for
their unbelief. Few only of them are believers!

O ye to whom the Scriptures have been given! believe in what we have sent
down confirmatory of the Scripture which is in your hands, ere we efface your
features, and twist your head round backward, or curse you as we cursed the
sabbath-breakers:14 and the command of God was carried into effect.

Verily, God will not forgive the union of other gods with Himself! But other
than this will forgive to whom He pleaseth. And He who uniteth gods with God
hath devised a great wickedness.

Hast thou not marked those who hold themselves to be righteous? But God
holdeth righteous whom He will; and they shall not be wronged the husk of a
date stone.

Behold how they devise a lie of God! Therein is wickedness manifest enough!

Hast thou not observed those to whom a part of the Scriptures hath been
given?15 They believe in Djibt and Thagout, and say of the infidels, "These
are guided in a batter path than those who hold the faith."

These are they whom God hath cursed: and for him whom God hath cursed, thou
shalt by on means find a helper.

Shall they have a share in the kingdom who would not bestow on their fellow
men even the speck in a date stone?

Envy they other men what God of his bounty hath given them? We gave of old
the Scriptures and wisdom to the line of Abraham, and we gave them a grand
kingdom:

-Some of them believe on the prophet and some turn aside from him:-the flame
of Hell is their sufficing punishment!

Those who disbelieve our signs we will in the end cast into the fire: so oft
as their skins shall be well burnt,16 we will change them for fresh skins,
that they may taste the torment. Verily God is Mighty, Wise!

But as for those who have believed, and done the things that are right, we
will bring being them into gardens 'neath which the rivers flow therein to
abide eternally;-therein shall they have wives of stainless purity: and we
will bring them into aye-shadowing shades.

Verily, God enjoineth you to give back your trusts to their owners, and when
ye judge between men, to judge with fairness. Excellent is the practice to
which God exhorteth you. God Heareth, Beholdeth!

O ye who believe! obey God and obey the apostle, and those among you invested
with authority; and if in aught ye differ, bring it before God and the
apostle, if ye believe in God and in the latter day. This is the best and
fairest way of settlement.

Hast thou not marked those who profess that they believe in what hath been
sent down to thee, and what hath been sent down before thee? Fain would they
be judged before Thagout, though commanded not to believe in him; and fain
would Satan make them wander with wanderings wide of truth.

And when it is said to them, "Accede to that which God hath sent down, and to
the apostle," thou seest the hypocrites avert them from thee with utter
aversion.

But how, when some misfortune shall fortune them, for their previous
handywork? Then will they come to thee, swearing by God, "We desire nothing
but to promote good and concord!"

These are they whose hearts God knoweth. Therefore break off from them, and
warn them, speak words that may penetrate their souls.

We have not sent any apostle but to be obeyed, it God so will: but if they,
after they have sinned to their own hurt by unbelief, come to thee and ask
pardon of God, and the apostle ask pardon for them, they shall surely find
that God is He who turneth unto man, Merciful.

And they will not-I swear by thy Lord-they will not believe, until they have
set thee up as judge between them on points where they differ. Then shall
they not find in their own minds any difficulty in thy decisions, and shall
submit with entire submission.

Had we laid down such a law for them as "Kill yourselves, or abandon your
dwellings," but few of them would have done it. But had they done that to
which they were exhorted, better and it been for them, and stronger for the
confirmation of their faith.

In that case we had surely given them from ourself a great recompense, and on
the straight path should we surely have guided them.

And whoever shall obey God and the Apostle, these shall be with those of the
Prophets, and of the Sincere, and of the Martyrs, and of the Just, to whom
God hath been gracious. These are a goodly band!

This is the bounty of God; and in knowledge doth God suffice.

O ye who believe! make use of precautions; and advance in detachments, or ,
advance in a body.

There is of you who will be a laggard: and if a reverse befall you he saith,
"Now hath God dealt graciously with me, since I was not with you in the
fight:"

But if a success from God betide you, he will say, as if there had never been
any friendship between you and him, "Would I had been with them! a rich prize
should I have won!"

Let those then fight on the path of God, who barter this present life for
that which is to come; for whoever fighteth on God's path, whether he be
slain or conquer, we will in the end give him a great reward.

But what hath come to you that ye fight not on the path of God, and for the
weak among men, women and children, who say, "O our Lord! bring us forth from
this city17 whose inhabitants are oppressors; give us a champion from thy
presence; and give us from thy presence a defender."

They who believe, fight on the path of God; and they who believe not, fight
on the path of Thagout: Fight therefore against the friends of Satan. Verily
craft of Satan shall be powerless!

Hast thou not marked those to whom it was said, "Withhold your hands awhile
from war; and observe prayer, and pay the stated alms." But when war is
commanded them, lo! a portion of them fear men as with the fear of God, or
with a yet greater fear, and say: "O our Lord! why hast thou commanded us
war? Couldst thou not have given us respite till our not distant end?" SAY:
Small the fruition of this world; but the next life is the true good for him
who feareth God! and ye shall not be wronged so much as the skin of a date
stone.

Wherever ye be, death will overtake you-although ye be in lofty towers! If
good fortune betide them, they say, "This is from God;" and if evil betide
them, they say, "This is from thee." SAY: All is from God: But what hath come
to these people that they are not near to understanding what is told them?

Whatever good betideth thee is from God, and whatever betideth thee of evil
is from thyself; and we have sent thee to mankind as an apostle: God is thy
sufficing witness.

Whoso obeyeth the Apostle, in so doing obeyeth God: and as to those who turn
back from thee, we have not sent thee to be their keeper.

Moreover, they say: "Obedience!" but when they come forth from thy presence,
a party of them brood by night over other than thy words; but God writeth
down what they brood over: therefore separate thyself from them, and put thou
thy trust in God. is a sufficient protector!

Can they not consider the Koran? Were it from any other than God, they would
surely have found in it many contradictions.

And when tidings, either of security or alarm, reach them, they tell them
abroad; but if they would report them to the apostle, and to those who are in
authority among them, those who desire information would learn it from them.
But for the goodness and mercy of God towards you, ye would have followed
Satan except a few!

Fight, therefore, on God's path: lay not burdens on any but thyself; and stir
up the faithful. The might of the infidels haply will god restrain, for God
is the stronger in prowess, and the stronger to punish.

He who shall mediate between men for a good purpose shall be the gainer by
it. But he who shall mediate with an evil mediation shall reap the fruit of
it. And God keepeth watch over everything.

If ye are greeted with a greeting, then greet ye with a better greeting, or
at least return it: God taketh count of all things.

God! there is no god but He! He will certainly assemble you on the day of
resurrection. There is no doubt of it. And whose word is more true than
God's?

Why are ye two parties on the subject of the hypocrites, when God hath cast
them off for their doings? Desire ye to guide those whom god hath led astray?
But for him whom God leadeth astray, thou shalt by no means find a pathway.

They desire that ye should be infidels as they are infidels, and that ye
should be alike. Take therefore none of them for friends, till they have fled
their homes for the cause of God. If they turn back, then seize them, and
slay them wherever ye find them; but take none of them as friends or helpers,

Except those who shall seek and asylum among your allies, and those who come
over to you-their hearts forbidding them to make war on you, or to make war
on their own people. Had God pleased, he would have given them power against
you, and they would have made war upon you! But, if they depart from you, and
make not war against you and offer you peace, the God alloweth you no
occasion against them.

Ye will find others who seek to gain your confidence as well as that of their
own people: So oft as they return to sedition, they shall be overthrown in
it: But if they leave you not, nor propose terms or peace to you nor withhold
their hands, then seize them, and slay them, wherever ye find them. Over
these have we given you undoubted power.

A believer killeth not a believer but by mischance: and whoso killeth a
believer by mischance shall be bound to free a believer from slavery; and the
blood-money shall be paid to the family of the slain, unless they convert it
into alms. But if the slain believer be of a hostile people, then let him
confer freedom on a slave who is a believer; and if he be of a people between
whom and yourselves there is an alliance, then let the blood-money be paid to
his family, and let him set free a slave who is a believer: and let him who
hath not the means, fast two consecutive months. This is the penance enjoined
by God; and God is Knowing, Wise!

But whoever shall kill a believer of set purpose, his recompense shall be
hell; for ever shall he abide in it; God shall be wrathful with him, and
shall curse him, and shall get ready for him a great torment.

O believers! when ye go forth to the fight for the cause of God, be
discerning, and say not to every one who meeteth you with a greeting, "Thou
art not a believer"18 in your greed after the chance good things of this
present life! With God are abundant spoils. Such hath been your wont in times
past; but god hath been gracious to you. Be discerning, then, for God well
knoweth what ye do.

Those believers who sit at home free from trouble, and those who do valiantly
in the cause of God with their substance and their persons, shall not be
treated alike. God hath assigned to those who contend earnestly with their
persons and with their substance, a rank above those who sit at home. Goodly
promises hath He made to all. But God hath assigned to the strenuous a rich
recompense, above those who sit still at home,

Rank of his own bestowal, and forgiveness, and mercy; for God is Indulgent,
Merciful.

The angels,19 when they took the souls of those who had been unjust to their
own weal, demanded, "What hath been your state?"20 They said, "We were the
weak ones21 of the earth." They replied, "Was not God's earth broad enough
for you to flee away in?" These! their home shall be Hell, and evil the
passage to it-

Except the men and women and children who were not able, through their
weakness, to find the means of escape, and were not guided on their way.
These haply God will forgive: for God is Forgiving, Gracious.

Whoever flieth his country for the cause of God, will find in the earth many
under like compulsion, and abundant resources; and if any one shall quit his
home and fly to God and his apostle, and then death overtake him,-his reward
from God is sure: for God is Gracious, Merciful!

And when ye go forth to war in the land, it shall be no crime in you to cut
short your prayers,22 if ye fear lest the infidels come upon you; Verily, the
infidels are your undoubted enemies!

And when thou, O apostle! shalt be among them, and shalt pray with them, then
let a party of them rise up with thee, but let them take their arms; and when
they shall have made their prostrations, let them retire to your rear: then
let another party that hath not prayed come forward, and let them pray with
you; but let them take their precautions and their arms. Pleased would the
infidels be for you to neglect your arms and your baggage, that they might
turn upon you at once! And it shall be no crime in you to lay down your arms
if rain annoy you, or if ye be sick. But take your precautions.23 Verily, God
hath made ready a shameful torment for the infidels.

And when ye shall have ended the prayer, make mention of God, standing, and
sitting, and reclining: and as soon as ye are secure, observe prayer; for to
the faithful, prayer is a prescribed duty, and for stated hours.

Slacken not in pursuit of the foe. If ye suffer, assuredly they suffer also
as ye suffer; but ye hope from God for what they cannot hope! And God is
Knowing, Wise!

Verily, we have sent down the Book to thee with the truth, thou that mayest
judge between men according as God hath given thee insight: But with the
deceitful ones dispute not: and implore pardon of God. Verily, God is
Forgiving, Merciful.24

And plead not with us for those who are self-deceivers; for God loveth not
him who is deceitful, criminal.

From men they hide themselves; but they cannot hide themselves from God: and
when they hold nightly discourses which please Him not, He is with them. God
is round about their doings!

Oh! ye are they who plead in their favour in this present life; but who shall
plead with God for them on the day of the resurrection? Who will be the
guardian over them?

Yet he who doth evil, or shall have acted against his own weal, and then
shall ask pardon of God, will find God Forgiving, Merciful:

And whoever committeth a crime, committeth it to his own hurt. And God is
Knowing, Wise!

And whoever committeth an involuntary fault or a crime, and then layeth it on
the innocent, shall surely bear the guilt of calumny and of a manifest crime.

But for the grace and mercy of God upon thee, a party among them had resolved
to mislead thee, but they shall only mislead themselves; nor in aught shall
they harm thee. God hath caused the Book and the wisdom to descend upon thee:
and what thou knowest not He hath caused thee to know: and the grace of God
toward thee hath been great.

In most of their secret talk is nothing good; but only in his who enjoineth
almsgiving, or that which is right, or concord among men. Whoso doth this,
out of desire to please God, we will give him at the last a great reward:

But whoso shall sever himself from the prophet after that "the guidance" hath
been manifested to him, and shall follow any other path than that of the
faithful, we will turn our back on him as he hath turned his back on us, and
we will cast him into Hell;-an evil journey thither!

God truly will not forgive the joining other gods with Himself. Other sins He
will forgive to whom He will: but he who joineth gods with God, hath erred
with far-gone error.

They call, beside Him, upon mere goddesses! they invoke a rebel Satan!

On them is the malison of God. For he said, "A portion of thy servants will I
surely take, and will lead them astray, and will stir desires within them,
and will command them and they shall cut the ears of animals;25 and I will
command them, and they shall alter the creation of God."26 He who taketh
Satan rather than God for his patron, is ruined with palpable ruin:

He hath made them promises, and he hath stirred desires within them; but
Satan promiseth, only to beguile!

These! their dwelling Hell! no escape shall they find from it!

But they who believe and do the things that are right, we will bring them
into gardens beneath which the rivers flow; For ever shall they abide
therein. Truly it is the promise of God: And whose word is more sure than
God's?

Not according to your wishes, or the wishes of the people of the Book, shall
these things be. He who doth evil shall be recompensed for it. Patron or
helper, beside God, shall he find none.

But whoso doth the things that are right, whether male or female, and he or
she a believer,-these shall enter Paradise, nor shall they be wronged the
skin of a date stone.

And who hath a better religion than he who resigneth himself to God, who doth
what is good, and followeth the faith of Abraham in all sincerity? And God
took Abraham for his friend.

All that is in the Heavens and all that is on the Earth is God's: and God
encompasseth all things!

Moreover, they will consult thee in regard to women: SAY: God hath instructed
you about them; and His will is rehearsed to you, in the Book, concerning
female orphans to whom ye give not their legal due, and whom ye refuse to
marry; also with regard to weak children; and that ye deal with fairness
towards orphans. Ye cannot do a good action, but verily God knoweth it.

And if a wife fear ill usage or aversion on the part of her husband, then
shall it be no fault in them if they can agree with mutual agreement, for
agreement is best. Men's souls are prone to avarice; but if ye act kindly and
fear God, then, verily, your actions are not unnoticed by God!

And ye will not have it at all in your power to treat your wives alike, even
though you fain would do so; but yield not wholly to disinclination, so that
ye leave one of them as it were in suspense; if ye come to an understanding,
and fear God, then, verily, God is Forgiving, Merciful;

But if they separate, God can compensate both out of His abundance; for God
is Vast, Wise;

And whatever is in the Heavens and in the Earth is God's! We have already
enjoined those to whom the Scriptures were given before you, and yourselves,
to fear God. But if ye become unbelievers, yet know that whatever is in the
Heavens and in the Earth is God's: and God is Rich, Praiseworthy.

All that is in Heaven and all that is in Earth is God's! God is a sufficient
protector!

If he pleased, he could cause you to pass away, O mankind! and create others
in your stead: for this hath God power.

If any one desire the reward of this world, yet with God is the reward of
this world and of the next! And God Heareth, Beholdeth.

O ye who believe! stand fast to justice, when ye bear witness before God,
though it be against yourselves, or your parents, or your kindred, whether
the party be rich or poor. God is nearer than you to both. Therefore follow
not passion, lest ye swerve from truth. And if ye wrest your testimony or
stand aloof, God verily is well aware of what ye do.

O ye who believe! believe in God and his Apostle, and the Book which he hath
sent down to his Apostle, and the Book which he hath sent down aforetime.
Whoever believeth not on God and his Angels and his Books and his Apostles,
and in the last day, he verily hath erred with far-gone error.

Verily, they who believed, then became unbelievers, then believed, and again
became unbelievers, and then increased their unbelief-it is not God who will
forgive them or guide them into the way.

Announce27 to the hypocrites that a dolorous torment doth await them.

Those who take the unbelievers for friends besides the faithful-do they seek
honour at their hands? Verily, all honour belongeth unto God!

And already hath He sent this down to you in the Book28 "WHEN YE SHALL HEAR
THE SIGNS OF GOD THEY SHALL NOT BE BELIEVED BUT SHALL BE MOCKED AT." Sit ye
not therefore with such, until they engage in other discourse; otherwise, ye
will become like them. Verily God will gather the hypocrites and the infidels
all together in Hell.

They watch you narrowly. Then if God grant you a victory, they say, "Are we
not with you?" and if the infidels meet with a success, they say to them,
"Were we not superior to you: and did we not defend you from those
believers?" God shall judge betwixt ye on the day of the resurrection, and
God will by no means make a way for the infidels over the believers.

The hypocrites would deceive God, but He will deceive them! When they stand
up for prayer, they stand carelessly, to be seen of men, and they remember
God but little:

Wavering between the one and the other-belonging neither to these nor those!
and by no means shalt thou find a path for him whom God misleadeth.

O believers! take not infidels for friends rather than believers. Would ye
furnish God with clear right to punish you?

Verily the hypocrites shall be in the lowest abyss of the fire: and, by no
means shalt thou find a helper for them;

Save for those who turn and amend, and lay fast hold on God, and approve the
sincerity of their religion to God; these shall be numbered with the
faithful, and God will at last bestow on the faithful a great reward.

Why should God inflict a chastisement upon you, if ye are grateful, and
believe? God is Grateful, Wise!

God loveth not that evil be matter of public talk, unless any one hath been
wronged: God it is who Heareth, Knoweth!

Whether ye publish what is good, or conceal it, or pardon evil, verily God is
Pardoning, Powerful!

Of a truth they who believe not on God and his Apostles, and seek to separate
God from his Apostles, and say, "Some we believe, and some we believe not,"
and desire to take a middle way;

These! they are veritable infidels! and for the infidels have we prepared a
shameful punishment.

And they who believe on God and his Apostles, and make no difference between
them these! we will bestow on them their reward at last. God is Gracious,
Merciful!

The people of the Book will ask of thee to cause a Book to come down unto
them out of Heaven. But a greater thing than this did they ask of Moses! for
they said, "Shew us God plainly!" and for this their wickedness did the fire-
storm lay hold on them. Then took they the calf as the object of their
worship, after that our clear tokens had come to them; but we forgave them
this, and conferred on Moses undoubted power.

And we uplifted the mountain 29 over them when we made a covenant with them,
and we said to them, "Enter the gate adoring:"and we said to them,
"Transgress not on the Sabbath," and we received from them a strict covenant.

So, for that they have broken their covenant, and have rejected the signs of
God, and have put the prophets to death unjustly, saying the while, "Our
hearts are uncircumcised,"-Nay, but God hath sealed them up for their
unbelief, so that but few believe.

And for their unbelief,-and for their having spoken against Mary a grievous
calumny,-

And for their saying, "Verily we have slain the Messiah, Jesus the son of
Mary, an Apostle of God." Yet they slew him not, and they crucified him not,
but they had only his likeness.30 And they who differed about him were in
doubt concerning him: No sure knowledge had they about him, but followed only
an opinion, and they did not really slay him, but God took him up to Himself.
And God is Mighty, Wise!

There shall not be one of the people of the Book but shall believe in Him
before his death, and in the day of resurrection, He will be a witness
against them.

For the wickedness of certain Jews, and because they turn many from the way
of God, we have forbidden them goodly viands which had been before allowed
them.

And because they have taken usury, though they were forbidden it, and have
devoured men's substance in frivolity, we have got ready for the infidels
among them a grievous torment.

But their men of solid knowledge, and the believers who believe in that which
hath been sent down to thee, and in what hath been sent down before thee, and
who observe prayer, and pay the alms of obligation, and believe in God and
the latter day,-these! we will give them a great reward.

Verily we have revealed to thee as we revealed to Noah and the Prophets after
him, and as we revealed to Abraham, and Isma√´l, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
tribes, and Jesus, and Job, and Jonah, and Aaron, and Solomon; and to David
gave we Psalms.

Of some apostles we have told thee before: of other apostles we have not told
thee-And discoursing did God discourse with Moses-

Apostles charged to announce and to warn, that men, after those apostles,
might have no plea against God. And God is Mighty, Wise!

But God is himself witness of what He hath sent down to thee: In His
knowledge hath He sent it down to thee. The angels are also its witnesses:
but God is a sufficient witness!

Verily, they who believe not and pervert from the way of God, have indeed
erred with error wide of truth.

Verily, those who believe not, and act wrongfully, God will never pardon, and
never will he guide them on path,

Than the path to Hell, in which they shall abide for ever! And this is easy
for God.

O men! now hath an apostle come to you with truth from your Lord. Believe
then, it will be better for you. But if ye believe not, then, all that is in
the Heavens and the Earth is God's; and God is Knowing, Wise!

O ye people of the Book! overstep not bounds in your religion;31 and of God,
speak only truth. The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, is only an apostle of God,
and his Word which he conveyed into Mary, and a Spirit32 proceeding from
himself. Believe therefore in God and his apostles, and say not, "Three:"
(there is a Trinity)-Forbear-it will be better for you. God is only one God!
Far be it from His glory that He should have a son! His, whatever is in the
Heavens, and whatever is in the Earth! And God is a sufficient Guardian.

The Messiah disdaineth not to be a servant of God, nor do the angels who are
nigh unto Him.

And whoso disdaineth His service, and is filled with pride, God will gather
them all to Himself.

And to those who believe and do the things that are right, will He pay them
their due recompense, and out of His bounty will He increase them: but as for
those who are disdainful and proud, with a grievous chastisement will He
chastise them;

And none beside God shall they find to protect or to help them.

O men! now hath a proof come to you from your Lord, and we have sent down to
you a clear light. As to those who believe in God and lay fast hold on Him,
these will He cause to enter into his mercy and grace, and along the straight
way unto Himself will He guide them.

They will consult thee. SAY: God instructeth you as to distant kindred. If a
man die childless, but have a sister, half what he shall have shall be her's;
and if she die childless he shall be her heir. But if there be two sisters,
two-third parts of what he shall have shall be theirs; and if there be both
brothers and sisters, the male shall have the portion of two females. God
teacheth you plainly, that ye err not! God knoweth all things.


_______________________

1 Most of the events alluded to in this Sura fall between the end of the
third and the close of the fifth year after the Flight to Medina.

2 Muhammad assumed to himself the privilege of having a yet greater number of
wives. But in doing so, he was probably actuated by a desire for male
offspring. Chadijah was his only wife until quite a late period of his
career. Comp. Arbah Turim. Ev. Hazaer 1, "A man may marry many wives, for
Rabba saith it is lawful to do so, if he can provide for them. Nevertheless,
the wise men have given good advice, that a man should not marry more than
four wives." See also Yad Hachazakah Hilchoth Ishuth. 14, 3.

3 Verses 8 and 12 are said by the commentators to have been revealed in
consequence of the complaints of Omm Kuhha that, in accordance with the ante-
Islamitic custom, she had been excluded from any portion of her deceased
husband's property. The unsatisfactory nature of the Muhammadan traditions
may be inferred from the fact, that no less than six different names are
assigned to him. It is, however, probable that these and similar laws
relative to inheritances were given at a time when many heads of families had
fallen, as at Ohod, in battle. This remark applies to verses 33-45.

4 Women found guilty of adultery and fornication were punished at the first
rise of Islam, by being literally immured. But this was exchanged, in the
case of a maiden, for one year's banishment and 100 stripes; and in the case
of a married woman, for stoning.

5 What took place in the times of ignorance, previous to the revelation of
the Koran. See Freytag's Einl. p. 201, as to the incestuous nature of the
ante-Islamitic Arabian marriages.

6 By marrying without means adequate to the support of a free wife, or by
remaining single.

7 From marrying slaves.

8 Games of chance, usury, etc.

9 By providing for them a home and the protection of a husband. Or, of that
which God would have them care for.

10 An undutiful child is very seldom heard of among the Egyptians, or the
Arabs in general. Sons scarcely ever sit, or sit, or eat, or smoke, in the
presence of the father unless bidden to do so; and they often wait upon him
and upon his guests at meals and on other occasions: they do not cease to act
thus when they have become men. Lane's Mod. Egypt. vol. i. p. 69.

11 The Koranic precepts as to prayer savour of Jewish origin. Thus, "Prayer
should be said standing" is a Rabbinic precept.-Comp. Sura [xci.] ii. 240.-
Misch.Berachoth 10-may be shortened in dangerous places, ib. iv. 10-is
forbidden to the drunken, ib. 31, 2. Erubin, 64-and to the polluted;
Berachoth iii. 4-and is to be preceded, in this case, by washings with water
or sand. See Sura xvii. 110, note 2, p. 173. 1 Cor. xi. 21.

12 The Jews and their Rabbis.

13 See Sura [xci.] ii. 98.

14 Lit. the companions of the sabbath. See [xci.] ii. 61.

15 This refers to certain renegade Jews, who out of hatred against Muhammad,
went over to the Koreisch. See N√∂ldeke. p. 149.

16 Lit. ripened.

17 Mecca.

18 And therefore a fit subject for plunder.

19 Some of the Meccans after embracing Islam did not thoroughly break with
the infidels and fly their country. These persons were miraculously slain by
angels at Bedr. Others suppose the angels to be Nakir and Monkir, who examine
the dead in the grave.

20 That is, to what religion did ye belong?

21 And therefore could not resist the unbelievers.

22 Thus the Rabbins Tr. Berachoth, iv. 4, "He that goeth in a dangerous place
may pray a short prayer."

23 See Mischna Tr. Berachoth, 10.

24 This verse is said to have been revealed when Muhammad was about to acquit
a Muslim who had committed theft, and laid the guilt at the door of a Jew.
But the particulars are given in a very contradictory manner. See N√∂ldeke, p.
151.

25 In allusion to an idolatrous and superstitious custom of the old Arabians.

26 By the mutilation of slaves, branding their bodies, filing the teeth, etc.

27 See Sura lxxxiv. 24, p. 47, note.

28 Sura vi.

29 See Sura [xci.] ii.7.

30 Lit. one was made to appear to them like (Jesus). Comp. [xcvii.] iii.48.
Photius, Bibl. Cod. cxiv.says that the Apocr. Book, [Greek text]-This
individual according to the Basilidans was-Simon of Cyrene; according to the
Evang. Barnab¬ë, Judas.-Mani, Ep. Fund. ap. Evodium: "Princeps itaque
tenebrarum cruci est affixus, idemque coronam spineam portavit."

31 By believing too much, like the Christians who regarded Jesus as God; or
too little, like the Jews who would not believe on Muhammad.

32 That is, a Being possessing a Spirit.


SURA LXV.-DIVORCE1 [CI.]

MECCA.-12 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O PROPHET! when ye divorce women, divorce them at their special times. And
reckon those times exactly, and fear God your Lord. Put them not forth from
their houses, nor allow them to depart, unless they have committed a proven
adultery. This is the precept of God; and whoso transgresseth the precept of
God, assuredly imperilleth his own self. Thou knowest not whether, after
this, God may not cause something new to occur which may bring you together
again.

And when they have reached their set time, then either keep them with
kindness, or in kindness part from them. And take upright witnesses from
among you, and bear witness as unto God. This is a caution for him who
believeth in God and in the latter day. And whoso feareth God, to him will He
grant a prosperous issue, and will provide for him whence he reckoned not
upon it.

And for him who putteth his trust in Him will God be all-sufficient. God
truly will attain his purpose. For everything hath God assigned a period.

As to such of your wives as have no hope of the recurrence of their times, if
ye have doubts in regard to them, then reckon three months, and let the same
be the term of those who have not yet had them. And as to those who are with
child, their period shall be until they are delivered of their burden. God
will make His command easy to him who feareth Him.

This is God's command which He hath sent down to you: Whoso feareth God, his
evil deeds will He cancel and will increase his reward.

Lodge the divorced wherever ye lodge, according to your means; and distress
them not by putting them to straits. And if they are pregnant, then be at
charges for the them till they are delivered of their burden; and if they
suckle your children, then pay them their hire and consult among yourselves,
and act generously: And if herin ye meet with obstacles, then let another
female suckle for him.

Let him who hath abundance of his abundance; let him, too, whose store is
scanty, give of what God hath vouchsafed to him. God imposeth burdens only
according to the means which He hath given. God will cause ease to succeed
difficulties.

How many cities have turned aside from the command of their Lord and of his
apostles! Therefore did we reckon with them in a severe reckoning, and
chastised them with a stern chastisement;

And they tasted the harmfulness of their own conduct: and the end of their
conduct was ruin.

A vehement chastisement hath God prepared for them! Fear God, then, O ye men
of understanding!2

Believers! Now hath God sent down to you a warning! a prophet, who reciteth
to you the clear signs of God, that he may bring those who believe, and do
the things that are right, out of the darkness into the light. And-whoso
believeth in God, and doeth the things that are right, God will cause them to
enter the gardens beneath which the rivers flow, to remain therein for aye! A
goodly provision now hath God made for him.

It is God who hath created seven heavens and as many earths.3 The Divine
command cometh down through them all, that ye may know that God hath power
over all things, and that God in his knowledge embraceth all things!


_______________________

1 Comp. Sura [xci.] ii. 228, which this Sura is perhaps intended to
supplement. Wahidi and Beidhawi state that it was revealed on account of Ibn
Omar who had divorced his wife at improper time, and was obliged to take her
again.

2 In order to make good the rhyme, verse 10 ought to be continued to the end
of the first clause of verse II.

3 Lit. and of the earth, their likes. The style of this verse resembles that
of the Meccan Suras. Hence, probably; a tradition in Omar ben Muhammad makes
the whole Sura Meccan.


SURA LIX.-THE EMIGRATION [CII.]

MEDINA.-24 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ALL that is in the Heavens and all that is on the Earth praiseth God! He, the
Mighty, the Wise!

He it is who caused the unbelievers among the people of the Book to quit
their homes and join those who had EMIGRATED previously.1 Ye did not think
that they would quit them; and they on their part thought that their
fortresses would protect them against God: But God came upon them whence they
looked not for Him, and cast such fear into their hearts that by their own
hands as well as by the hands of the victorious believers they demolished
their houses! Profit by this example ye who are men of insight!

And were it not that God had decreed their exile, surely in this world would
he have chastised them: but in the world to come the chastisement of the fire
awaiteth them.

This because they set them against God and his apostle; and whoso setteth him
against God. . . . ! God truly is vehement in punishing.

Your cutting down some of their palm trees and sparing others was by God's
permission, and to put the wicked to shame.

After the spoils of these Jews which God hath assigned to his apostle, ye
pressed not with horse or camel.2 But God giveth his apostles power over what
he will. God is Almighty.

The spoil taken from the people of the towns and assigned by God to his
apostle, belongeth to God, and to the apostle, and to his kindred, and to the
orphan, and to the poor, and to the wayfarer, that none of it may circulate
among such of you only as are rich: What the apostle hath given you, take:
What he hath refused you, refuse: And fear ye God, for God is severe in
punishing.

To the poor refugees (Mohadjerin) also doth a part belong, who have been
driven from their homes and their substance, and who seek favour from God and
his goodwill, and aid God and his apostle. These are the men of genuine
virtue.

They of Medina who had been in possession of their abodes and embraced the
faith before them, cherish those who take refuge with them; and they find not
in their breasts any desire for what hath fallen to their share: they prefer
them before themselves, though poverty be their own lot. And with such as are
preserved from their own covetousness shall it be well.

And they who have come after them into the faith say, "O our Lord! forgive us
and our brethren who have preceded us in the faith, and put not into our
hearts ill-will against those who believe. O our Lord! thou verily art Kind,
Merciful."

Hast thou not observed the disaffected saying to their unbelieving brethren3
among the people of the Book, "If ye be driven forth, we will go forth with
you; and in what concerneth you, never will we obey any one; and if ye be
attacked we will certainly come to your help." But God is witness that they
are liars.

No! if they were driven forth, they would not share their banishment; if they
were attacked they would not help them, or if they help them they will surely
turn their backs: then would they remain unhelped.

Assuredly the fear of you is more intense in their hearts than the fear of
God! This because they are a people devoid of discernment.

They (the Jews) will not fight against you in a body except in fenced towns
or from behind walls. Mighty is their valour among themselves! thou thinkest
them united-but their hearts are divided. This for that they are a people who
understand not.

They act like those who lately preceded them,4 who also tasted the result of
their doings; and a grievous chastisement awaiteth them-

Like Satan when he saith to a man, "Be an infidel:" and when he hath become
an infidel, he saith, "I share not thy guilt:5 verily, I fear God the Lord of
the Worlds."

Of both, therefore, shall the end be that they dwell for ever in the fire:
This is the recompense of the evil doers.

O ye who believe! fear God. And let every soul look well to what it sendeth
on before for the morrow. And fear ye God: Verily, God is cognisant of what
ye do.

And be ye not like those who forget God, and whom He hath therefore caused to
forget their proper selves. Such men are the evil doers.

The inmates of the Fire and the inmates of Paradise are not to be held equal.
The inmates of Paradise only shall be the blissful.

Had we sent down this Koran on some mountain, thou wouldst certainly have
seen it humbling itself6 and cleaving asunder for the fear of God. Such are
the parables we propose to men in order that they may reflect.

He is God beside whom there is no god. He knoweth things visible and
invisible: He is the Compassionate, the Merciful.

He is God beside whom there is no god: He is the King, the Holy, the
Peaceful, the Faithful, the Guardian, the Mighty, the Strong, the Most High!
Far be the Glory of God from that which they unite with Him!

He is God, the Producer, the Maker, the Fashioner! To Him are ascribed
excellent titles. Whatever is in the Heavens and in the Earth praiseth Him.
He is the Mighty, the Wise!


_______________________

1 The Jews of Nadhir, three miles from Medina, had broken a treaty made with
Muhammad, and in the month Rab¬å of the fourth year of the Hejira were
besieged by him and driven first to the Jews of Kainoka, who had emigrated
previously, under compulsion, after the battle of Bedr, and subsequently out
of Arabia. Weil, Life of M. p.137.n.

2 On which account these spoils were entirely assigned to Muhammad, and not
divided in the usual manner. See Sura [xcv.] viii. 42. Weil, p. 138, 184.

3 To the Jews of the tribe of Nadhir.

4 The idolaters slain at Bedr (Djal.) or the Jews of Kainoka, who had been
plundered previously to those of Nadhir.

5 Lit. I am clear of thee.

6 This may be derived from the Rabbinical idea that Mount Sinai was chosen,
on account of its lowness, to be the scene of the revelation to Moses, in
order to shew that God loves the humble.


SURA XXXIII.-THE CONFEDERATES1 [CIII.]

MEDINA.-73 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O PROPHET, fear thou God, and obey not the unbelievers and the hypocrites;-
Truly God is Knowing, Wise:

But follow what is revealed to thee from thy Lord: Cognisant truly is He of
all your actions-

And put thou thy trust in God, for a sufficient guardian is God.

God hath not given a man two hearts within him; neither hath he made your
wives whom ye divorce2 to be as your mothers; nor hath he made your adopted
sons to be as your own sons. Such words are indeed in your mouths; but God
speaketh the truth, and in the right way He guideth.

Name them after their fathers: this will be more right before God. But if ye
know not who their fathers are, then let them be your brethren in the faith,
and your comrades. And unless made with intent of heart, mistakes in this
matter shall be no crime in you: for God is Lenient, Merciful.

Nearer of kin to the faithful is the Prophet, than they are to their own
selves. His wives are their mothers. According to the Book of God, they who
are related by blood, are nearer the one to the other than other believers,
and than those who have fled their country3 for the cause of God: but
whatever kindness ye shew to your kindred, shall be noted down in the Book.

And remember that we have entered into covenant with the Prophets, and with
thee, and with Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus, Son of Mary: and we
formed with them a strict covenant,

That God may question the men of truth as to their truth.4 But a sore torment
hath He prepared for the unbelievers.

O believers!5 remember the goodness of God towards you, when the armies came
against you, and we sent against them a blast, and hosts that ye saw not; for
the eye of God was upon your doings:

When they assailed you from above you, and from below you,6 and when your
eyes became distracted, and your hearts came up into your throat, and ye
thought divers thoughts of God:

Then were the faithful tried, and with strong quaking did they quake:

And when the disaffected and the diseased7 of heart said, "God and his
Apostle have made us but a cheating promise:"

And when a party of them said, "O people of Yathrib!8 there is no place of
safety for you here;9 therefore return into the city." And another party of
you asked the prophet's leave to return, saying, "Our houses are left
defenceless." No! they were not left defenceless: but their sole thought was
to flee away.

If the enemy had effected an entry at all points, and they (the disaffected)
had been asked to promote confusion, they would have done so; but only a
short time would they have remained in it.-(Medina).10

They had before pledged themselves to God that they would not turn their
backs; and a pledge given to God must be enquired of.

SAY: Flight shall not profit you; if ye have fled the death or the slaughter,
yet even then, but a little while shall ye enjoy your good things!

SAY: Who is he that will screen you from God, whether He choose to bring evil
on you, or to shew you mercy? None beside God shall they find to be their
patron or helper.

God well knoweth those among you who cause hindrances, and those who say to
their brethren, "Come hither to us;" and who come not to the fight except a
little.

It is out of covetousness in your regard: for when an alarm cometh, thou
mayest see them look to thee, and roll their eyes like him on whom the
shadows of death have fallen! Yet, when the alarm is passed, with sharp
tongues will they assail you, covetous of the best of the spoil. No faith
have these! God will make their doings of no avail! And easy is this with
God.

They thought that the CONFEDERATES would never retire:11 and were the
confederates to come again, they would fain be dwelling among the Arabs of
the desert, and there ask news about you! for though they were with you, they
fought not except a little.

A noble pattern had ye in God's Apostle, for all who hope in God, and in the
latter day, and oft remember God!

And when the faithful saw the confederates, they said, "This is what God and
His Apostle promised us,12 and God and His Apostle spoke truly:" and it only
increased their faith and self-devotion.

Some were there among the faithful who made good what they had promised to
God. Some have fulfilled their course, and others await its fulfilment, and
have not been changelings who change-

That God may reward the faithful for their faithfulness, and may punish the
hypocrites, if He so please, or be turned unto them: for God is Forgiving,
Merciful.

And God drove back the infidels in their wrath; they won no advantage; God
sufficed the faithful in the fight: for God is Strong, Mighty!

And He caused those of the people of the Book (the Jews), who had aided the
confederates, to come down out of their fortresses, and cast dismay into
their hearts: some ye slew, others ye took prisoners.13

And He gave you their land, and their dwellings, and their wealth, for an
heritage-even a land on which ye had never set foot: for the might of God is
equal to all things.

O Prophet! say to thy wives,14 If ye desire this present life and its
braveries, come then, I will provide for you, and dismiss you with an
honourable dismissal.

But if ye desire God and His Apostle, and a home in the next life, then,
truly, hath God prepared for those of you who are virtuous, a great reward.

O wives of the Prophet! should any of you be guilty of a proven lewdness,
doubly shall her chastisement be doubled: and with God this is easy.

But whoever of you shall obey God and His Apostle, and shall do that which is
right, twice over will we give her her reward, and we have prepared for her a
noble provision.

O wives of the Prophet! ye are not as other women. If ye fear God, be not too
complaisant of speech, lest the man of unhealthy heart should lust after you,
but speak with discreet speech.

And abide still in your houses, and go not in public decked as in the days of
your former ignorance,15 but observe prayer, and pay the impost, and obey God
and the Apostle: for God only desireth to put away filthiness from you16 as
his household, and with cleansing to cleanse you.

And recollect what is rehearsed to you in your houses of the Book of God, and
of wisdom: for God is keen-sighted, cognisant of all.

Truly the men who resign themselves to God (Muslims), and the women who
resign themselves, and the believing men and the believing women, and the
devout men and the devout women, and the men of truth, and the women of
truth, and the patient men and the patient women, and the humble men and the
humble women, and the men who give alms and the women who give alms, and the
men who fast and the women who fast, and the chaste men and the chaste women,
and the men and the women who oft remember God: for them hath God prepared
forgiveness and a rich recompense.

And it is not for a believer, man or woman, to have any choice in their
affairs, when God and His Apostle have decreed a matter: and whoever
disobeyeth God and His Apostle, erreth with palpable error.

And, remember, when thou saidst to him unto whom God had shewn favour,17 and
to whom thou also hadst shewn favour, "Keep thy wife to thyself, and fear
God;" and thou didst hide in thy mind what God would bring to light.18 and
thou didst fear man; but more right had it been to fear God. And when Zaid
had settled concerning her to divorce her, we married her to thee, that it
might not be a crime in the faithful to marry the wives of their adopted
sons, when they have settled the affair concerning them. And the behest of
God is to be performed.

No blame attacheth to the prophet where God hath given him a permission. Such
was the way of God with those prophets who flourished before thee; for God's
behest is a fixed decree-

Who fulfilled the mission with which God had charged them,19 and feared Him,
and feared none but God. And God taketh a sufficient account.

Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the Apostle of
God, and the seal of the prophets: and God knoweth all things.

O Believers! remember God with frequent remembrance, and praise Him morning
and evening.

He blesseth you, and His angels intercede for you, that He may bring you
forth out of darkness into light: and Merciful is He to the Believers.

Their greeting on the day when they shall meet Him shall be "Peace!" And He
hath got ready for them a noble recompense.

O Prophet ! we have sent thee to be a witness, and a herald of glad tidings,
and a warner;

And one who, through His own permission, summoneth to God, and a light-giving
torch.

Announce, therefore, to believers, that great boons do await them from God;

And obey not the Infidels and Hypocrites-yet abstain from injuring them: and
put thou thy trust in God, for God is a sufficient guardian.

O Believers! when ye marry believing women, and then divorce them before ye
have consummated the marriage, ye have no term prescribed you, which ye must
fulfil towards them: provide for them, and dismiss them with a reputable
dismissal.

O Prophet! we allow thee thy wives whom thou hast dowered, and the slaves
whom thy right hand possesseth out of the booty which God hath granted thee,
and the daughters of thy uncle, and of thy paternal and maternal aunts who
fled with thee to Medina, and any believing woman who hath given herself up
to the Prophet, if the Prophet desired to wed her-a Privilege for thee above
the rest of the Faithful.

We well know what we have settled for them, in regard to their wives and to
the slaves whom their right hands hold, that there may be no fault on thy
part:20 and God is Indulgent, Merciful!

Thou mayst decline for the present whom thou wilt of them, and thou mayest
take to thy bed her whom thou wilt, and whomsoever thou shalt long for of
those thou shalt have before neglected; and this shall not be a crime in
thee. Thus will it be easier to give them the desire of their eyes, and not
to put them to grief, and to satisfy them with what thou shalt accord to each
of them. God knoweth what is in your hearts, and God is Knowing, Gracious.

It is not permitted thee to take other wives hereafter,21 nor to change thy
present wives for other women, though their beauty charm thee, except slaves
whom thy right hand shall possess.22 And God watcheth all things.

O Believers! enter not into the houses of the Prophet,23 save by his leave,
for a meal, without waiting his time. When ye are invited then enter, and
when ye have eaten then disperse at once.24 And engage not in familiar talk,
for this would cause the Prophet trouble, and he would be ashamed to bid you
go; but God is not ashamed to say the truth. And when ye would ask any gift
of his wives, ask it from behind a veil. Purer will this be for your hearts
and for their hearts. And ye must not trouble the Apostle of God, nor marry
his wives, after him, for ever. This would be a grave offence with God.

Whether ye bring a matter to the light or hide it, God truly hath knowledge
of all things.

No blame shall attach to them (your wives) for speaking to their fathers
unveiled, or to their sons, or to their brothers, or to their brothers' sons,
or to their sisters' sons, or to their women, or to the slaves whom their
right hands hold. And fear ye God: for God witnesseth all things.

Verily, God and His Angels bless the Prophet! Bless ye Him, O Believers, and
salute Him with salutations of Peace.

Verily, they who affront God and His Apostle, the curse of God is on them in
this world, and in the world to come: and He hath prepared for them a
shameful chastisement.

And they who shall affront believing men and believing women, for no fault of
theirs, they shall surely bear the guilt of slander, and of a clear wrong.

O Prophet! speak to thy wives and to thy daughters,25 and to the wives of the
Faithful, that they let their veils fall low. Thus will they more easily be
known, and they will not be affronted. God is Indulgent, Merciful!

If the Hypocrites, and the men of tainted heart, and the stirrers of sedition
in Medina desist not, we will surely stir thee up against them. Then shall
they not be suffered to dwell near thee therein, but a little while:

Cursed wherever they are found; they shall be seized and slain with
slaughter!

Such hath been the way of God with those who lived before them; and no change
canst thou find in the way of God.

Men will ask thee of "the Hour." SAY: The knowledge of it is with God alone:
and who can tell thee whether haply the Hour be not nigh at hand?

Verily, God hath cursed the Infidels, and hath got ready for them the flame:

For aye shall they abide therein; none to befriend them, no helper shall they
find!

On the day when their faces shall be rolled in the fire, they shall cry: "Oh!
would that we had obeyed God, and obeyed the Apostle!"

And they shall say: "Oh our Lord! indeed we obeyed our chiefs and our great
ones, and they misled us from the way of God-

O our Lord! give them a double chastisement, and curse them with a heavy
curse."

O Believers! be not like those who affronted Moses.26 But God cleared him
from what they said of him, and of God was he highly esteemed.

O Believers! fear God, and speak with well-guided speech.

That God may bless your doings for you, and forgive you your sins. And whoso
obeyeth God and His Apostle with great bliss shall be blessed.

Verily, we proposed to the Heavens, and to the Earth, and to the Mountains to
receive the Faith, but they refused the burden, and they feared to receive
it. Man undertook to bear it, but hath proved unjust, senseless!

Therefore will God punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women,
and the men and the women who join gods with God; but to the believing men
and women will God turn him: for God is Indulgent, Merciful!


_______________________

1 Medina was besieged, when this Sura was revealed, by certain confederate
tribes at the instigation of the Jews, an. Hej. 5. The first nine verses,
however, have no immediate reference to this event, but to Muhammad's
cotemporary marriage with Zeinab. See below, verse 37.

2 The Arabians had been accustomed, before the time of Muhammad, to divorce
their wives with the words,-thy back be to me as the back of my mother. The
drift and motive of this passage is explained by verse 37 below. It had also
been the custom to hold adopted sons to be as nearly related to them as their
natural ones. See Sura lviii. 2, p. 451.

3 The Mohadjers-those who had emigrated with Muhammad from Mecca. This verse
abrogates Sura [xcv.] viii. 73.

4 How they have discharged their prophetic functions.

5 Verses 9-33 have reference to the events of the year Hej. 5, towards the
close. See next note. His. 688; Waq. 4 f.

6 In the engagement which took place under the walls of Medina, some of the
enemy were posted on a height to the east of the city, others in a valley on
the west. The besiegers were 12,000, the Muslims 3,000 strong, when a violent
storm, which upset the tents, put out the camp fires, and blinded the eyes of
the confederates with sand, turned the scale of victory against them.
Muhammad ascribes the storm to angelic agency.

7 That is, with infidelity.

8 The ancient name of El-Medina.

9 In the trenches which had been dug around the city by the advice of Salm√¢n,
the Persian.

10 They would speedily have quitted the city to attack the faithful in the
trenches.

11 That is, raise the siege.

12 That is, that through trials we should attain to Paradise, v. 29.

13 After the siege of Medina had been raised, Muhammad made a successful
expedition against the Jews of Koreidha, for their treason and violation of
treaties.

14 Muhammad's wives having caused him much annoyance by demands of rich
dresses, etc., he gave them the choice of continuing with him as before, or
of divorce. They chose the former. See Abulfeda's Hist. Moh. p. 77, and
Gagnier's Vie de Moh. i. 4, chap. ii.

15 That is, Idolatry. Acts xvii. 30. Freytag (Einl. p. 453) thinks that
previous to Islam, the Arabian women went in public unveiled.

16 The pronoun is in the pl. masc., whereas the pl. fem. is used in the
previous part of the verse. The partisans of Ali quote this passage to prove
the intimate union of Ali and his posterity with the Prophet.

17 That is, to Zaid. The favour of God to Zaid consisted in having caused him
to become a Muslim: the favour of Muhammad in adopting him as his son. Zaid
and Abu Lahab (Sura cxi. p. 29) are the only contemporaries of Muhammad
mentioned by name in the Koran.

18 Thy plan to obtain Zeinab, or Zenobia, Zaid's wife, as thy wife.

19 Lit, who brought the messages of God.

20 If thou makest use of the special prerogative (conferred in verse 49).

21 He had nine wives at this period, beside slaves. The number of wives
allowed to the faithful is four. See note, p. 411. 22 The first slave whom
Muhammad took to wife was Raihana, at the conquest of the Banu Koreidha. His.
693. Weil, 170.

23 Verses 53-55 refer to the conduct of the guests at Muhammad's house after
his marriage with Zeinab. Albuhari passim. Muslim i. 824 ff. Wah. Comp.
Caussir, iii. 151.

24 Ullmann, p. 263, quotes a similar precept from the Talmud, "Do all that
the master of the house biddeth, but wait not to be asked to depart."

25 This verse cannot be of later date than Hej. 8, when Muhammad's daughter
Omm Kulthum died. leaving only Fatima.

26 This may refer to the charge of adultery said by the Rabbins to have been
brought by Korah against Moses. Comp. Tr. Sanhedrin, fol. 110a. and Numbers
xii. 1. The verse is said to have been revealed on account of aspersions
thrown on Muhammad for unfairly dividing spoils, whereupon he said, "God be
merciful to my brother Moses. He was wronged more than this, and bore it with
patience."


SURA LXIII.1-THE HYPOCRITES [CIV.]

MEDINA.-11 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHEN the Hypocrites come to thee, they say, "We bear witness that thou art
the Sent One of God." God knoweth that thou art His Sent One: but God beareth
witness that the HYPOCRITES do surely lie.

Their faith2 have they used as a cloak, and they turn aside others from the
way of God! Evil are all their doings.

This, for that they believed, then became unbelievers!Therefore hath a seal
been set upon their hearts, and they understand not.

When thou seest them, their persons make thee marvel; and if they speak, thou
listenest with pleasure to their discourse. Like timbers are they leaning
against a wall!3 They think that every shout is against them. They are
enemies-Beware of them then-God do battle with them! How false are they!

And when it is said to them, "Come, the Apostle of God will ask pardon for
you," they turn their heads aside, and thou seest them withdraw in their
pride.

Alike shall it be to them whether thou ask forgiveness for them, or ask it
not. By no means will God forgive them: God hath no guidance for a perverse
people.

These are they who say to you of Medina, "Spend not aught upon those who are
with the Apostle of God, and they will be forced to quit him." Yet the
treasures of the Heavens and of the Earth are God's! But the Hypocrites have
no understanding.

They say: "If we return to the city, the mightier will assuredly drive out
the weaker from it." But might is with God, and with the Apostle, and with
the Faithful! Yet the Hypocrites understand not.

O ye who believe! let not your wealth and your children delude you into
forgetfulness of God. Whoever shall act thus, shall surely suffer loss.

And expend in the cause of God out of that with which we have supplied you,
ere death surprise each one of you, and he say, "O Lord! wilt thou not
respite me to a term not far distant, that I may give alms, and become one of
the just?"

And by no means will God respite a soul when its hour hath come! And God is
fully cognisant of what ye do.


_______________________

1 Revealed shortly after the expedition against the Banu 'l Mustaliq in Hej.
6. See N√∂ld. p. 156 n. The "Hypocrites" mentioned in the later Suras are the
disaffected portion of the population of Medina, who covertly opposed the
claims of Muhammad to temporal authority over that city. They were gradually
absorbed, as the authority of Islam increased.

2 Or, in accordance with another reading, oaths. Comp. Ps. cix. 18.

3 Like timbers or joists supported in a wall or leaned against it, i.e.,
their persons are bulky, but their hearts so hypocritical and cowardly that
they are afraid of the slightest noise. In the original, saƒèkat is perhaps an
allusion to the shout of Gabriel, that is to exterminate the wicked.


SURA XXIV.-LIGHT [CV.]

MEDINA.-64 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

A SURA which we have sent down and sanctioned! Clear signs have we sent down
therein, that ye may take warning.

The whore and the whoremonger-scourge each of them with an hundred stripes;
and let not compassion keep you from carrying out the sentence of God, if ye
believe in God and the last day: And let some of the faithful witness their
chastisement.1

The whoremonger shall not marry other than a whore or an idolatress; and the
whore shall not marry other than a whoremonger or an idolater. Such alliances
are forbidden to the faithful.

They who defame virtuous women,2 and bring not four witnesses, scourge them
with fourscore stripes, and receive ye not their testimony for ever, for
these are perverse persons-

Save those who afterwards repent and live virtuously; for truly God is
Lenient, Merciful!

And they who shall accuse their wives, and have no witnesses but themselves,
the testimony of each of them shall be a testimony by God four times
repeated, that he is indeed of them that speak the truth.3

And the fifth time that the malison of God be upon him, if he be of them that
lie.

But it shall avert the chastisement from her if she testify a testimony four
times repeated, by God, that he is of them that lie;

And a fifth time to call down the wrath of God on her, if he have spoken the
truth.

And but for the goodness and mercy of God towards you, and that God is He who
loveth to turn, Wise . . . . !

Of a truth, they who advanced that lie4 were a large number of you; but
regard it not as an evil to you. No, it is an advantage to you.5 To every man
among them shall it be done according to the offence he hath committed; and
as to that person6 among them who took on himself to aggravate it, a sore
punishment doth await him.

Did not the faithful of both sexes, when ye heard of this, form a favourable
judgment in their own minds, and say,

"This is a manifest lie?"

Have they brought four witnesses of the fact? If they cannot produce the
witnesses, they are the liars in the sight of God.

And but for the goodness of God towards you, and His mercy in this world and
in the next, a severe punishment had come upon you for that which ye spread
abroad, when ye uttered with your tongues, and spake with your mouths that of
which ye had no knowledge. Ye deemed it to be a light matter, but with God it
was a grave one.

And did ye say when ye heard it, "It is not for us to talk of this affair! O
God! By thy Glory, this is a gross calumny?"

God hath warned you that ye go not back to the like of this for ever, if ye
be believers:

And God maketh His signs clear to you: for God is Knowing, Wise.

But as for those who love that foul calumnies should go forth against those
who believe, a grievous chastisement awaits them

In this world and in the next. And God hath knowledge, but ye have not.

And but for the goodness of God towards you and His Mercy, and that God is
Kind, Merciful . . . !

O ye who believe! follow not the steps of Satan, for whosoever shall follow
the steps of Satan, he will enjoin on him what is base and blameworthy; and
but for the goodness of God towards you,7 and His mercy, no one of you had
been cleansed for ever: but God maketh whom He will to be clean, and God
Heareth, Knoweth.

And let not persons of wealth and means among you swear that they will not
give to their kindred, to the poor, and to those who have fled their homes in
the cause of God; let them rather pardon and pass over the offence.8 Desire
ye not that God should forgive you? And God is Gracious, Merciful!

Verily, they who throw out charges against virtuous but careless women, who
yet are believers, shall be cursed in this world and in the world to come;
and a terrible punishment doth await them.

Their own tongues, and hands, and feet, shall one day bear witness against
them of their own doings.9

On that day will God pay them their just due, and they shall know that God is
the clear Truth itself.

Bad women for bad men, and bad men for bad women; but virtuous women for
virtuous men, and virtuous men for virtuous women! These shall be cleared
from calumnies; theirs shall be forgiveness and an honourable provision.

O ye who believe! enter not into other houses10 than your own, until ye have
asked leave, and have saluted its inmates. This will be best for you: haply
ye will bear this in mind.

And if ye find no one therein, then enter it not till leave be given you; and
if it be said to you, "Go ye back," then go ye back. This will be more
blameless in you, and God knoweth what ye do.

There shall be no harm in your entering houses in which no one dwelleth, for
the supply of your needs: and God knoweth what ye do openly and what ye hide.

Speak unto the believers that they restrain their eyes and observe
continence. Thus will they be more pure. God is well aware of what they do.

And speak to the believing women that they refrain their eyes, and observe
continence; and that they display not their ornaments, except those which are
external; and that they throw their veils over their bosoms, and display not
their ornaments, except to their husbands or their fathers, or their
husbands' fathers, or their sons, or their husbands' sons, or their brothers,
or their brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women, or their
slaves, or male domestics who have no natural force, or to children who note
not women's nakedness. And let them not strike their feet together, so as to
discover their hidden ornaments.11 And be ye all turned to God, O ye
Believers! that it may be well with you.

And marry those among you who are single, and your good servants, and the
handmaidens. If they are poor, God of His bounty will enrich them. God is
all-bounteous, Knowing.

And let those who cannot find a match12 live in continence till God of His
bounty shall enrich them. And to those of your slaves who desire a deed of
manumission, execute it for them, if ye know good in them, and give them a
portion of the wealth of God which He hath given you.13 Force not your female
slaves into sin, in order that ye may gain the casual fruitions of this
world, if they wish to preserve their modesty. Yet if any one compel them,
then Verily to them, after their compulsion, will God be Forgiving, Merciful.

And now have we sent down to you clear signs, and an instance from among
those who flourished before you, and a caution for the God-fearing.14

God is the LIGHT of the Heavens and of the Earth. His Light is like a niche
in which is a lamp-the lamp encased in glass-the glass, as it were, a
glistening star. From a blessed tree is it lighted, the olive neither of the
East nor of the West, whose oil would well nigh shine out, even though fire
touched it not! It is light upon light. God guideth whom He will to His
light, and God setteth forth parables to men, for God knoweth all things.

In the temples which God hath allowed to be reared, that His name may therein
be remembered, do men praise Him morn and even.

Men whom neither merchandise nor traffic beguile from the remembrance of God,
and from the observance of prayer, and the payment of the stated alms,
through fear of the day when hearts shall throb and eyes shall roll:

That for their most excellent works may God recompense them, and of His
bounty increase it to them more and more: for God maketh provision for whom
He pleaseth without measure.

But as to the infidels, their works are like the vapour in a plain which the
thirsty dreameth to be water, until when he cometh unto it, he findeth it not
aught, but findeth that God is with him; and He fully payeth him his account:
for swift to take account is God:

Or like the darkness on the deep sea when covered by billows riding upon
billows, above which are clouds: darkness upon darkness. When a man reacheth
forth his hand, he cannot nearly see it! He to whom God shall not give light,
no light at all hath he!

Hast thou not seen how all in the Heavens and in the Earth uttereth the
praise of God?-the very birds as they spread their wings? Every creature
knoweth its prayer and its praise! and God knoweth what they do.

God's, the Kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth: and unto God the final
return!

Hast thou not seen that God driveth clouds lightly forward, then gathereth
them together, then pileth them in masses? And then thou seest the rain
forthcoming from their midst; and He causeth clouds like mountains charged
with hail, to descend from the heaven, and He maketh it to fall on whom He
will, and from whom He will He turneth it aside.-The brightness of His
lightning all but taketh away the sight!

God causeth the day and the night to take their turn. Verily in this is
teaching for men of insight. And God hath created every animal of water.15
Some go upon the belly; some go upon two feet; some go upon four feet. God
hath created what He pleased. Aye, God hath power over all things.

Now have we sent down distinct signs.-And God guideth whom He will into the
right path:

For there are who say "We believe on God and on the Apostle, and we obey;"
yet, after this, a part of them turn back.16 But these are not of the
faithful.

And when they are summoned before God and His Apostle that He may judge
between them, lo! a part of them withdraw:

But had the truth been on their side, they would have come to Him, obedient.

What! are they diseased of heart? Do they doubt? Are they afraid that God and
His Apostles will deal unfairly with them? Nay, themselves are the unjust
doers.

The words of the believers, when called to God and His Apostle that He may
judge between them, are only to say, "We have heard, and we obey:" these are
they with whom it shall be well.

And whoso shall obey God, and His Apostle, and shall dread God and fear Him,
these are they that shall be the blissful.

And they have sworn by God, with a most solemn oath, that if thou give them
the word, they will certainly march forth. Say: swear ye not: of more worth
is obedience. Verily, God is well aware of what ye do.

SAY: Obey God and obey the Apostle. Suppose that ye turn back, still the
burden of his duty is on him only, and the burden of your duty rests on you.
If ye obey Him, ye shall have guidance: but plain preaching is all that
devolves upon the Apostle.

God hath promised to those of you who believe and do the things that are
right, that He will cause them to succeed others in the land, as He gave
succession to those who were before them, and that He will establish for them
that religion which they delight in, and that after their fears He will give
them security in exchange. They shall worship Me: nought shall they join with
Me: And whoso, after this, believe not, they will be the impious.

But observe prayer, and pay the stated alms, and obey the Apostle, that haply
ye may find mercy.

Let not the Infidels think that they can weaken God on His own Earth: their
dwelling place shall be the Fire! and right wretched the journey!

O ye who believe! let your slaves, and those of you who have not come of age,
ask leave of you, three times a day, ere they come into your presence;-before
the morning prayer, and when ye lay aside your garments at mid-day, and after
the evening prayer. These are your three times of privacy. No blame shall
attach to you or to them, if after these times, when ye go your rounds of
attendance on one another, they come in without permission. Thus doth God
make clear to you His signs: and God is Knowing, Wise!

And when your children come of age, let them ask leave to come into your
presence, as they who were before them asked it. Thus doth God make clear to
you his signs: and God is Knowing, Wise.

As to women who are past childbearing, and have no hope of marriage, no blame
shall attach to them if they lay aside their outer garments, but so as not to
shew their ornaments. Yet if they abstain from this, it will be better for
them: and God Heareth, Knoweth.

No crime17 shall it be in the blind, or in the lame, or in the sick, to eat
at your tables: or in yourselves, if ye eat in your own houses, or in the
houses of your fathers, or of your mothers, or of your brothers, or of your
sisters, or of your uncles on the father's side, or of your aunts on the
father's side, or of your uncles on the mother's side, or of your aunts on
the mother's side, or in those of which ye possess the keys, or in the house
of your friend. No blame shall attach to you whether ye eat together or
apart.

And when ye enter houses, salute one another with a good and blessed greeting
as from God. Thus doth God make clear to you His signs, that haply ye may
comprehend them.

Verily, they only are believers who believe in God and His Apostle, and who,
when they are with him upon any affair of common interest, depart not until
they have sought his leave. Yes, they who ask leave of thee, are those who
believe in God and His Apostle. And when they ask leave of Thee on account of
any affairs of their own, then grant it to those of them whom thou wilt, and
ask indulgence for them of God: for God is Indulgent, Merciful.

Address not the Apostle as ye address one another.18 God knoweth those of you
who withdraw quietly from the assemblies, screening themselves behind others.
And let those who transgress his command beware, lest some present trouble
befall them, or a grievous chastisement befall them, hereafter.

Is not whatever is in the Heavens and the Earth God's? He knoweth your state;
and one day shall men be assembled before Him, and He will tell them of what
they have done: for God knoweth all things.


_______________________

1 With this verse commences the reference to the scandal against Ayesha, to
which verses 6-9 read like a later addition. See His. 731 ff. Albuhari,
passim. Muslim ii. 628 ff. Tirm. 524. Tabari and Weil, p. 151.

2 Said to refer to Hilal ben Umaiya (Muslim i. 886. Tirm. 523. Annasai, 409
f. Assamarq.) who had accused his wife of adultery. Two of these
commentators, however, give the name of another Muslim as the person
intended.

3 Comp. Numb. v. ii, 31, with which Muhammad must have been acquainted.

4 The rumour of improper intimacy between Ayesha and Safwan Ibn El Moattal,
during Muhammad's return from the expedition against the tribe of Mostaliq
(an. Hej. 9), in which he was separated from her for an entire day, which she
passed in the company of Safwan, who had found her when accidentally left
behind. Verses 4-26 were revealed shortly after the return.

5 Whose characters are cleared.

6 Abdallah Ibn Obba. (Abulf. p. 83.)

7 Comp. verse 10, 11 (n.).

8 Abubekr had been desirous to punish one of his relatives, Mestah, who had
propagated the scandal against Ayesha, by refusing him gifts or alms.

9 "The very members of a man shall testify against him, for thus we read
(Jer. xliii. 12), Ye are yourselves my witnesses saith the Lord." Chagiga,
16. Thaanith, 11a.

10 It was the custom in Arabia, before Islam, to enter houses without
permission. Freyt. Einl. p. 216.

11 That is, the anklets. Comp. Isai. iii. 16, 18

12 On account of poverty.

13 Comp. Deut. xv. 12 15.

14 The meaning probably is, that the scandal raised against Ayesha resembled
the scandal in the case of Joseph in Egypt, and of the Virgin Mary, detailed
in previous suras.

15 An idea perhaps derived from Gen. i. 20, 21. Comp. Tr. Cholin, fol. 27a.

16 Verses 46-56 obviously refer to a period, perhaps that between the battle
of Ohod and the end of the war of the Ditch, when Muhammad's prospects were
overclouded and the confidence of his followers shaken.

17 This verse was intended to relieve the scruples of the Muslims, who.
following the superstitious customs of the Arabs, thought that they ought not
to admit the blind, etc. to their tables, to eat alone, or in a house of
which they were entrusted with the key, etc.

18 Lit. make not the calling of the Apostle among you, like the calling of
some of you to others, i.e., address him by some respectful and honourable
title. Thus in the Talmud, "It is forbidden to a disciple to call his Rabbi
by name even when he is not in his presence;" and again: "Neither is he to
salute his Rabbi, nor to return his salutation, in the same way that
salutations are given and returned among friends." "Whoever despises the wise
men hath no portion in the world to come." See Hilchoth Torah, c.5.


SURA LVIII.-SHE WHO PLEADED [CVI.]

MEDINA.-22 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

God hath heard the words of HER1 WHO PLEADED with thee against her husband,
and made her plaint to God; and God hath heard your mutual intercourse: for
God Heareth, Beholdeth.

As to those of you who put away their wives by saying, "Be thou to me as my
mother's back" their mothers2 they are not; they only are their mothers who
gave them birth! they certainly say a blameworthy thing and an untruth:

But truly, God is Forgiving, Indulgent.

And those who thus put away their wives, and afterwards would recall their
words, must free a captive before they can come together again. To this are
ye warned to conform: and God is aware of what ye do.

And he who findeth not a captive to set free, shall fast two months in
succession before they two come together. And he who shall not be able to do
so, shall feed sixty poor men. This, that he may believe in God and His
Apostle. These are the statutes of God: and for the unbelievers is an
afflictive chastisement!

Truly they who oppose God and His Apostle shall be brought low, as those who
were before them were brought low. And now have we sent down demonstrative
signs: and, for the Infidels is a shameful chastisement.

On the day when God shall raise them all to life, and shall tell them of
their doings. God hath taken count of them, though they have forgotten them!
and God is witness over all things.

Dost thou not see that God knoweth all that is in the Heavens and all that is
in the Earth? Three persons speak not privately together, but He is their
fourth; nor five, but He is their sixth; nor fewer nor more, but wherever
they be He is with them. Then on the day of resurrection He will tell them of
their deeds: for God knoweth all things.

Hast thou not marked those who have been forbidden secret talk, and return to
what they have been forbidden, and talk privately together with wickedness,
and hate, and disobedience towards the Apostle? And when they come to thee,
they greet thee not as God greeteth thee:3 and they say among themselves,
"Why doth not God punish us for what we say?" Hell shall be their meed:4 they
shall be burned at its fire: and a wretched passage thither!

O Believers! when ye hold private converse together, let it not be with
wickedness, and hate, and disobedience towards the Apostle; but let your
private talk be with justice and the fear of God: aye, fear ye God unto whom
ye shall be gathered!

Only of Satan is this clandestine talk, that he may bring the faithful to
grief: but, unless by God's permission, not aught shall he harm them! in God
then let the faithful trust.

O ye who believe! when it is said to you, "Make room in your assemblies,"
then make ye room. God will make room for you in Paradise! And when it is
said to you, "Rise up," then rise ye up. God will uplift those of you who
believe, and those to whom "the Knowledge" is given, to lofty grades! and God
is cognisant of your actions.

O ye who believe! when ye go to confer in private with the Apostle, give alms
before such conference. Better will this be for you, and more pure. But if ye
have not the means, then truly God is Lenient, Merciful.

Do ye hesitate to give alms previously to your private conference? Then if ye
do it not (and God will excuse it in you), at least observe prayer, and pay
the stated impost, and obey God and His Apostle: for God is cognisant of your
actions.

Hast thou not remarked those who make friends of that people with whom God is
angered? They are neither of your party nor of theirs; and they swear to a
lie,5 knowing it to be such.

God hath got ready for them a severe torment: for, evil is that they do.

They make a cloak of their faith, and turn others aside from the way of God:
wherefore a shameful torment awaiteth them.

Not at all shall their wealth or their children avail them aught against God.
Companions shall they be of the fire: they shall abide therein for ever.

On the day when God shall raise them all, they will swear to Him as they now
swear to you, deeming that it will avail them.  Are they not-yes they-the
liars?

Satan hath gotten mastery over them, and made them forget the remembrance of
God. These are Satan's party. What! shall not verily the party of Satan be
for ever lost.

Verily, they who oppose God and His Apostle shall be among the most vile. God
hath written this decree: "I will surely prevail, and my Apostles also."
Truly God is Strong, Mighty.

Thou shalt not find that any of those who believe in God, and in the last
day, love him who opposeth God and His Apostle, even though they be their
fathers, or their sons, or their brethren, or their nearest kin. On the
hearts of these hath God graven the Faith, and with His own Spirit hath He
strengthened them; and He will bring them into gardens, beneath whose shades
the rivers flow, to remain therein eternally. God is well pleased in them,
and they in Him. These are God's party! Shall not, of a truth, a party of God
be for ever blessed?


_______________________

1 Khaula, daughter of Thalaba, who had been divorced by the formula in verse
2, which was understood among the Arabs to imply perpetual separation. This
Muhammad had asserted in her case; but in consequence of the woman's prayers,
etc., a relaxation of the law, on fulfilment of the conditions mentioned in
verses 4, 5, was hereby allowed. None of the earlier traditions fix any date
for this Sura, though later authorities (Weil, 184) fix the end of Hej. 6, or
the beginning of Hej. 7.-The subject matter is in part similar to that of
Sura xxiv.

2 See Sura [ciii.] xxxiii. 4.

3 Instead of saying, Es-salam aleika, "Peace be on thee," the Infidels and
Jews said, Es-sam aleika, "a plague, or poison on thee." See Geiger, p. 18.

4 Lit. sufficiency.

5 The Jews swear that they are Muslims.


SURA XXII.-THE PILGRIMAGE [CVII.]

MEDINA.1-78 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O MEN of Mecca, fear your Lord. Verily, the earthquake of the last Hour will
be a tremendous thing!

On the day when ye shall behold it, every suckling woman shall forsake her
sucking babe; and every woman that hath a burden in her womb shall cast her
burden; and thou shalt see men drunken, yet are they not drunken: but it is
the mighty chastisement of God!

There is a man2 who, without knowledge, wrangleth about God, and followeth
every rebellious Satan;

Concerning whom it is decreed, that he shall surely beguile and guide into
the torment of the Flame, whoever shall take him for his Lord.

O men! if ye doubt as to the resurrection, yet, of a truth, have We created
you of dust, then of the moist germs of life, then of clots of blood, then of
pieces of flesh shapen and unshapen, that We might give you proofs of our
power! And We cause one sex or the other, at our pleasure, to abide in the
womb until the appointed time; then We bring you forth infants; then permit
you to reach your age of strength; and one of you dieth, and another of you
liveth on to an age so abject that all his former knowledge is clean
forgotten!3 And thou hast seen the earth dried up and barren: but when We
send down the rain upon it, it stirreth and swelleth, and groweth every kind
of luxuriant herb.

This, for that God is the Truth, and that it is He who quickeneth the dead,-
and that He hath power over everything:

And that "the Hour" will indeed come-there is no doubt of it-and that God
will wake up to life those who are in the tombs.

A man there is who disputeth about God without knowledge or guidance or
enlightening Book,

Turning aside in scorn to mislead others from the way of God! Disgrace shall
be his in this world; and on the day of the resurrection, We will make him
taste the torment of the burning:-

"This, for thy handywork of old! for God is not unjust to His servants."

There are some who serve God in a single point. If good come upon one of
them, he resteth in it; but if trial come upon him, he turneth him round (to
infidelity) with the loss both of this world and of the next! This same is
the clear ruin!

He calleth upon that beside God which can neither hurt him nor profit him.
This same is the far-gone error!

He calleth on him who would sooner hurt than profit him. Surely, bad the
lord, and, surely, bad the vassal!

But God will bring in those who shall believe and do the things that are
right, into gardens 'neath which the rivers flow: for God doth that which He
pleaseth.

Let him who thinketh that God will not help His Apostle in this world and in
the next, stretch a cord aloft as if to destroy himself; then let him cut it,
and see whether his devices can bring that4 to nought at which he was angry!

Thus send we down the Koran with its clear signs (verses): and because God
guideth whom He pleaseth.

As to those who believe, and the Jews, and the Sabeites,5 and the Christians,
and the Magians, and those who join other gods with God, of a truth, God
shall decide between them on the day of resurrection: for God is witness of
all things.

Seest thou not that all in the Heavens and all on the Earth adoreth God? the
sun and the moon and the stars, and the mountains, and the trees, and the
beasts, and many men? But of many is chastisement the due:

And whom God shall disgrace there shall be none to honour: God doth that
which pleaseth Him.

These, the Faithful and the Infidels, are the two disputants who dispute
concerning their Lord: but for those who have disbelieved, garments of fire
shall be cut out; the boiling water shall be poured down upon their heads:

All that is in their bowels, and their skins, shall be dissolved: and there
are maces of iron for them!

So oft as they, for very anguish, would fain come forth thence, back shall
they be turned into it: and-"Taste ye the torment of the burning."

But God will bring in those who shall have believed, and done the things that
are right, into gardens 'neath which the rivers flow. Adorned shall they be
therein with golden bracelets and with pearls, and their raiment therein
shall be of silk;

For they were guided to the best of words; guided to the glorious path!

But those who believe not, and seduce others from the way of God, and from
the Holy Mosque which we have appointed to all men, alike for those who abide
therein, and for the stranger;

And those who seek impiously to profane it, we will cause to taste a grievous
punishment.

And call to mind when we assigned the site of the House6 to Abraham and said:
"Unite not aught with Me in worship, and cleanse My House for those who go in
procession round it, and who stand or bow in worship:"-

And proclaim to the peoples a PILGRIMAGE: Let them come to thee on foot and
on every fleet7 camel, arriving by every deep defile:

That they may bear witness of its benefits to them, and may make mention of
God's name on the appointed days,8 over the brute beasts with which He hath
supplied them for sustenance: Therefore eat thereof yourselves, and feed the
needy, the poor:

Then let them bring the neglect of their persons to a close,9 and let them
pay their vows, and circuit the ancient House.

This do. And he that respecteth the sacred ordinances of God, this will be
best for him with his Lord. The flesh of cattle is allowed you, save of those
already specified to you. Shun ye, therefore, the pollutions of idols; and
shun ye the word of falsehood;

Sound in faith Godward, uniting no god with Him; for whoever uniteth gods
with God, is like that which falleth from on high, and the birds snatch it
away, or the wind wafteth it to a distant place.

This do. And they who respect the rites of God, perform an action which
proceedeth from piety of heart.

Ye may obtain advantages from the cattle up to the set time for slaying them:
then, the place for sacrificing them is at the ancient House.

And to every people have we appointed rites, that they may commemorate the
name of God over the brute beasts which He hath provided for them. And your
God is the one God. To Him, therefore, surrender yourselves: and bear thou
good tidings to those who humble them,-

Whose hearts, when mention is made of God, thrill with awe; and to those who
remain steadfast under all that be-falleth them, and observe prayer, and give
alms of that with which we have supplied them.

And the camels have we appointed you for the sacrifice to God: much good have
ye in them. Make mention, therefore, of the name of God over them when ye
slay them, as they stand in a row; and when they are fallen over on their
sides, eat of them, and feed him who is content and asketh not, and him who
asketh. Thus have We subjected them to you, to the intent ye should be
thankful.10

By no means can their flesh reach unto God, neither their blood; but piety on
your part reacheth Him. Thus hath He subjected them to you, that ye might
magnify God for His guidance: moreover, announce to those who do good deeds-

That God will ward off mischief from believers: for God loveth not the false,
the Infidel.

A sanction is given to those who, because they have suffered outrages, have
taken up arms; and verily, God is well able to succour them:

Those who have been driven forth from their homes wrongfully, only because
they say "Our Lord is the God." And if God had not repelled some men by
others, cloisters, and churches, and oratories, and mosques, wherein the name
of God is ever commemorated, would surely have been destroyed. And him who
helpeth God will God surely help:11 for God is right Strong, Mighty:-

Those who, if we establish them in this land, will observe prayer, and pay
the alms of obligation, and enjoin what is right, and forbid what is evil.
And the final issue of all things is unto God.

Moreover, if they charge thee with imposture, then already, before them, the
people of Noah, and Ad and Themoud, and the people of Abraham, and the people
of Lot, and the dwellers in Madian, have charged their prophets with
imposture! Moses, too, was charged with imposture! And I bore long with the
unbelievers; then seize on them: and how great was the change I wrought!

And how many cities which had been ungodly, and whose roofs are now laid low
in ruin, have We destroyed! And wells have been abandoned and lofty castles!

Have they not journeyed through the land? Have they not hearts to understand
with, or ears to hear with? It is not that to these sights their eyes are
blind, but the hearts in their breasts are blind!

And they will bid thee to hasten the chastisement. But God cannot fail His
threat. And verily, a day with thy Lord is as a thousand years,12 as ye
reckon them!

How many cities have I long borne with, wicked though they were, yet then
laid hold on them to chastise them! Unto Me shall all return.

SAY: O men! I am only your open warner:

And they who believe and do the things that are right, shall have forgiveness
and an honourable provision;

But those who strive to invalidate our signs shall be inmates of Hell.

We have not sent any apostle or prophet before thee, among whose desires
Satan injected not some wrong desire, but God shall bring to nought that
which Satan had suggested. Thus shall God affirm His revelations13 for God is
Knowing, Wise!

That He may make that which Satan hath injected, a trial to those in whose
hearts is a disease, and whose hearts are hardened.-Verily, the wicked are in
a far-gone severance from the truth!-

And that they to whom "the Knowledge" hath been given, may know that the
Koran is the truth from thy Lord, and may believe in it, and their hearts may
acquiesce in it: for God is surely the guider of those who believe, into the
straight path.

But the Infidels will not cease to doubt concerning it, until "the Hour" come
suddenly upon them, or until the chastisement of the day of desolation come
upon them.

On that day the Kingdom shall be God's: He shall judge between them: and they
who shall have believed and done the things that are right, shall be in
gardens of delight:

But they who were Infidels and treated our signs as lies-these then-their's a
shameful chastisement!

And as to those who fled their country for the cause of God, and were
afterwards slain, or died, surely with goodly provision will God provide for
them! for verily, God! He, surely, is the best of providers!

He will assuredly bring them in with an in-bringing that shall please them
well: for verily, God is right Knowing, Gracious.

So shall it be. And whoever in making exact reprisal for injury done him,
shall again be wronged, God will assuredly aid him: for God is most Merciful,
Gracious.

So shall it be; for that God causeth the night to enter in upon the day, and
He causeth the day to enter in upon the night: and for that God Heareth,
Seeth.

So shall it be, for that God is the truth; and because what they call on
beside Him is vanity: and because God is the Lofty, the Mighty!

Seest thou not that God sendeth down water from Heaven, and that on the
morrow the earth is clad with verdure? for God is benignant, cognisant of
all.

His, all in the Heavens and all on Earth: and verily, God! He assuredly is
the Rich, the Praiseworthy!

Seest thou not that God hath put under you whatever is in the earth; and the
ships which traverse the sea at His bidding? And He holdeth back the heaven
that it fall not on the earth, unless He permit it! for God is right Gracious
to mankind, Merciful.

And He it is who hath given you life, then will cause you to die, then will
give you life-of a truth man is all ungrateful.

To every people have we appointed observances which they observe. Therefore,
let them not dispute this matter with thee, but bid them to thy Lord, for
thou art on the right way:

But if they debate with thee, then Say: God best knoweth what ye do!

God will judge between you on the day of resurrection, as to the matters
wherein ye differ.

Knowest thou not that God knoweth whatever is in the Heaven and on the Earth?
This truly is written in the Book: this truly is easy for God.

They worship beside God, that for which He hath sent down no warranty, and
that of which they have no knowledge: but for those who commit this wrong, no
helper!

And when our clear signs are rehearsed to them, thou mayst perceive disdain
in the countenances of the Infidels. Scarce can they refrain from rushing to
attack those who rehearse our signs to them! SAY: Shall I tell you of worse
than this? The fire which God hath threatened to those who believe not!
Wretched the passage thither!

O men! a parable is set forth to you, wherefore hearken to it. Verily, they
on whom ye call beside God, cannot create a fly, though they assemble for it;
and if the fly carry off aught from them, they cannot take it away from it!
Weak the suppliant and the supplicated!

Unworthy the estimate they form of God!14 for God is right Powerful, Mighty!

God chooseth messengers from among the angels and from among men: verily, God
Heareth, Seeth.

He knoweth what is before them and what is behind them; and unto God shall
all things return.

Believers! bow down and prostrate yourselves and worship your Lord, and work
righteousness that you may fare well.

And do valiantly in the cause of God as it behoveth you to do for Him. He
hath elected you, and hath not laid on you any hardship in religion, the
Faith of your father Abraham. He hath named you the Muslims

Heretofore and in this Book, that the Apostles may be a witness against you,
and that ye may be witnesses against the rest of mankind. Therefore observe
prayer, and pay the legal impost, and cleave fast to God. He is your liege
Lord-a goodly Lord, and a goodly Helper!


_______________________

1 This Sura is generally said to have been revealed at Mecca,-but this is
probably only the case with verses 1-24; 43-56; 60-65; 67-75. Mr. Muir places
it at the close of the Meccan Suras of the fifth period. See N√∂ld, p. 158.

2 Said to be Abu Jahl. See Sura xcvi. p. 20, n. 2.

3 Lit. so that after knowledge he knoweth not aught.

4 The teachings and progress of Islam.

5 See Sura [xci.] ii. 59. The Sabeites were probably Hanyfs. See Pref.

6 The Kaaba. Sharastani informs us that there was an opinion prevalent among
the Arabs, that the walking round the Kaaba, and other ceremonies, were
symbolic of the motion of the planets and of other astronomical facts.
Watwat, Mabahij al Fikr., Lib. i., c. 2, says that "most Arabic tribes were
originally star-worshippers, Sabeans. The people of Saba worshipped the Sun,
the tribes of Asad and Kaninah the Moon, etc. etc. At a later period they all
sunk into idolatry, and in the time of Muhammad, the idols round the Kaaba
amounted to 360."

7 Lit. thin, with the implied sense of fleet.

8 The ten first days of the Dhu'lhajja. For the ceremonies, see Freytag's
Einleitung, p. 418; Burton's Pilgrimage, vol. iii.; Sale's Notes and Prelim.
Disc.

9 That is, the uncut beards, nails, etc.

10 Offerings of animals are by no means confined to Mecca and the Pilgrimage.
"It is not uncommon," says Mr. Lane, "without any definite view but that of
obtaining general blessings, to make vows (of animals): and sometimes a
peasant vows that he will sacrifice, for the sake of a saint, a calf which he
possesses, as soon as it is grown and fatted. It is let loose, by consent of
all his neighbours, to pasture where it will, even in fields of young wheat;
and at last, after it has been sacrificed, a public feast is made of its
meat. Many a large bull is thus given away." Modern Egyptians, i. 307.
Compare Dr. Gobat's Abyssinia, p. 294, 7, for similar customs among
Christians of probably Arabian extraction. Five or six thousand animals are
said to have been slain in the valley of Mina by the pilgrims of the year
1854. (See Lieut. Burton's Pilgrimage, iii. p. 313.) The victim is considered
by the devout as an expression of their conviction that death is their desert
at the hands of God.

11 See Ibn Batoutah, iv. 106. (Par. ed.)

12 Comp. Sur. xxxii. 4, p. 190.

13 The ayats, signs or verses of the Koran. It is said by tradition that
Muhammad was consoled by this revelation for the Satanic suggestion mentioned
Sur. liii. 20, p. 70 (n.). But in this view of the text, for among whose
desires, or affections, we should render when he recited.

14 Lit. they measure not God with truth of His measurement.


SURA XLVIII.-THE VICTORY [CVIII.]

MEDINA.-29 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Verily, We have won for thee an undoubted VICTORY1-

In token that God forgiveth thy earlier and later faults, and fulfilleth His
goodness to thee, and guideth thee on the right way,

And that God succoureth thee with a mighty succour.

He it is who sendeth down a spirit of secure repose into the hearts of the
faithful that they might add faith to their faith; (for God's are the armies
of the Heavens and of the Earth: and God is Knowing, Wise:)

And that He may bring the believing men and the believing women into gardens
'neath whose trees the rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever, and that He
may cancel their evil deeds: for this is the great bliss with God:

And that He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and
the men and women who join other gods with God, and think evil thoughts of
Him. Theirs shall be a round of evil; and God is angry with them and curseth
them, and hath prepared Hell for them: and, an evil journey thither!

The armies of the Heavens and of the Earth are God's, and God is Mighty,
Wise!

Verily, we have sent thee to be a witness and a herald of good (an
announcer), and a warner,

That ye may believe on God and on His Apostle; and may assist Him, and honour
Him, and praise him, morning and evening.

In truth, they who plighted fealty to thee, really plighted that fealty to
God: the hand of God was over their hands! Whoever, therefore, shall break
his oath shall only break it to his own hurt; but whoever shall be true to
his engagement with God, He will give him a great reward.

The Arabs who took not the field with you,2 will say to thee,3 "We were
engaged with our property and our families; therefore ask thou pardon for
us." They speak with their tongues what is not in their hearts. SAY: And who
can have any power over God in your behalf, whether he will you some loss, or
whether he will you an advantage? Yes, God is acquainted with your doings.

But ye thought that the Apostle and the faithful could never more come back
to their families; and your hearts were pleased at this; and ye thought an
evil thought of this expedition, and ye became an undone people:

For, whoso believeth not in God, and His Apostle. . . .  Verily, we have got
ready the flame for the Infidels!

And God's is the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth: Whom He will He
forgiveth, and whom He will He punisheth: and God is Gracious, Merciful!

They who took not the field with you will say, when ye go forth to the spoil
to take it, "Let us follow you." Fain would they change the word of God.4
SAY: Ye shall by no means follow us: thus hath God said already. They will
say, "Nay, ye are jealous of us." Nay! they are men of little understanding.

SAY to those Arabs of the desert, who took not the field, ye shall be called
forth against a people of mighty valour. Ye shall do battle with them, or
they shall profess Islam. If ye obey, a goodly recompense will God give you;
but if ye turn back, as ye turned back aforetime, He will chastise you with a
sore chastisement.

It shall be no crime on the part of the blind, the lame, or the sick, if they
go not to the fight. But whoso shall obey God and His Apostle, he shall bring
him into the gardens 'neath which the rivers flow: but whoso shall turn back,
He will punish him with a sore punishment.

Well pleased now hath God been with the believers when they plighted fealty
to thee under the tree;5 and He knew what was in their hearts: therefore did
He send down upon them a spirit of secure repose, and rewarded them with a
speedy victory,

And with the rich booty which they took: for God is Mighty, Wise!

God promised you the taking of a rich booty6 and sped it to you; and He
withheld men's hands from you, for a sign to the faithful, and that He might
guide you along the right way:-

And other booty, over which ye have not yet had power: but now hath God
compassed them for you; for God is over all things Potent.

If the Infidels shall fight against you, they shall assuredly turn their
backs; then, neither protector nor helper shall they find!

Such is God's method carried into effect of old; no change canst thou find in
God's mode of dealing.

And He it was who held their hands from you and your hands from them in the
valley of Mecca,7 after that He had given you the victory over them: for God
saw what ye did.

These are they who believed not, and kept you away from the sacred Mosque, as
well as the offering which was prevented from reaching the place of
sacrifice. And had it not been that ye would have trodden down believers,
both men and women, whom ye knew not, so that a crime might have lighted on
you without your knowledge on their account, and that God would bring whom He
will within His mercy, this would have been otherwise ordered. Had they been
apart,8 we had surely punished such of them as believed not, with a sore
punishment.

When the unbelievers had fostered rage in their hearts-the rage of ignorance
(of heathens)-God sent down His peace on His Apostle and on the faithful, and
stablished in them the word of piety, for they were most worthy and deserving
of it: and God knoweth all things.

Now hath God in truth made good to His Apostle the dream9 in which he said,
"Ye shall surely enter the sacred Mosque, if God will, in full security,
having your heads shaved and your hair cut: ye shall not fear; for He knoweth
what ye know not; and He hath ordained you, beside this, a speedy victory."

It is He who hath sent His Apostle with "the Guidance," and the religion of
truth, that He may exalt it above every religion. And enough for thee is this
testimony on the part of God.

Muhammad is the Apostle of God; and his comrades are vehement against the
infidels, but full of tenderness among themselves. Thou mayst see them bowing
down, prostrating themselves, imploring favours from God, and His acceptance.
Their tokens10 are on their faces, the marks of their prostrations. This is
their picture in the Law, and their picture in the Evangel:11 they are as the
seed which putteth forth its stalk; then strengtheneth it, and it groweth
stout, and riseth upon its stem,12 rejoicing the husbandman-that the infidels
may be wrathful at them. To such of them as believe and do the things that
are right, hath God promised forgiveness and a noble recompense.


_______________________

1 This Sura was probably revealed shortly after the peace of Hudaibiya. Ann.
Hej. 6. Some commentators, however, understand the Victory of the taking of
Mecca two years-later the preterite being used in the prophetic style for the
future-others of the taking of Chaibar, or Muta (?), a town of the Roman
empire.

2 Lit. were left behind.

3 On the return to Medina. See Weil's Leben M. p. 173 (n.).

4 The law relative to booty, viz. that those who were not at Hudaibiya should
have no share in the booty to be obtained from the Jews at Chaibar. Muhammad
marched against them in Hej. 7.

5 When the rumour reached Muhammad at Hudaibiya that Othman Ibn Affan, whom
he had sent to inform the Meccans that he was merely coming to visit their
temple, and with peaceable intentions, had been slain by them.

6 At Chaibar.

7 The valley of Mecca may mean Hudaibiya. But the commentators explain this
verse of different events. It probably, however, refers to the 50 (according
to Djalalein 80) prisoners whom Muhammad dismissed freely at Hudaibiya.

8 Had the believers been separate from the infidels.

9 This dream Muhammad had at Medina, before he set out for al Hudaibiya. His
followers expected its fulfilment within the year, but when the truce
frustrated their hopes, this verse was revealed to pacify them.

10 Dust from the pavement. The Muhammadans who say their prayers on carpets
often place little bricks before them which they touch in prostration with
their forehead.

11 Comp. Mark iv. 28.

12 Lit. legs.


SURA LXVI.-THE FORBIDDING [CIX.]

MEDINA.-12 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHY,1 O Prophet! dost thou hold that to be FORBIDDEN which God hath made
lawful to thee, from a desire to please thy wives, since God is Lenient,
Merciful?

God hath allowed you release from your oaths; and God is your master: and He
is the Knowing, Wise.

When the prophet told a recent occurrence as a secret to one of his wives,
and when she divulged it and God informed him of this, he acquainted her with
part and withheld part.2 And when he had told her of it, she said, "Who told
thee this?" He said, "The Knowing, the Sage hath told it me.

"If ye both be turned to God in penitence, for now have your hearts gone
astray . . . .3 but if ye conspire against the Prophet, then know that God is
his Protector, and Gabriel, and every just man among the faithful; and the
angels are his helpers besides.

"Haply if he put you both away, his Lord will give him in exchange other
wives better than you, Muslims, believers, devout, penitent, obedient,
observant of fasting, both known of men and virgins."

O Believers! save yourselves and your families from the fire whose fuel is
men and stones, over which are set angels fierce and mighty: they disobey not
God in what He hath commanded them, but execute His behests.

O ye Infidels! make no excuses for yourselves this day; ye shall surely be
recompensed according to your works.

O Believers! turn to God with the turning of true penitence; haply your Lord
will cancel your evil deeds, and will bring you into the gardens 'neath which
the rivers flow, on the day when God will not shame the Prophet, nor those
who have shared his faith: their light shall run before them, and on their
right hands! they shall say, "Lord perfect our light, and pardon us: for thou
hast power over all things."

O Prophet! make war on the infidels and hypocrites, and deal rigorously with
them. Hell shall be their abode! and wretched the passage to it!

God setteth forth as an example to unbelievers the wife of Noah and the wife
of Lot; they were under two of our righteous servants, both of whom they
deceived: but their husbands availed them nought against God: and it shall be
said "Enter ye into the fire with those who enter."

God also holdeth forth to those who believe the example of the wife of
Pharaoh,4 when she said, "Lord, build me an house with thee in Paradise, and
deliver me from Pharaoh and his doings; and deliver me from the wicked:"

And Mary, the daughter of Imran, who kept her maidenhood, and into whose
womb5 we breathed of our spirit, and who believed in the words of her Lord
and His Scriptures, and was one of the devout.


_______________________

1 The first verses of this Sura were revealed (Hej. 7.) on occasion of
Muhammad's reviving affection for Mary, a Copt slave sent him by the governor
of Egypt, from whom he had recently (verse 3) sworn to his wife Hafsa to
separate entirely. Hafsa, who had been greatly incensed at their amour, of
which Muhammad had himself informed her, communicated the matter in
confidence to Ayesha, from whose altered manner, probably, the prophet found
that his secret had been betrayed. To free Muhammad from his obligation to
Hafsa was the object of this chapter.

2 Muhammad withheld the fact that Ayesha, as well as God, was his informant,
but taxed Hafsa with not having kept his secret.

3 Supply God will pardon you.

4 Asia, a name, perhaps, corrupted from that of Pharaoh's daughter Bithiah. 1
Chron. iv.18.

5 See Sura xxi. 91. Lit. quae rimam suam tuita est, in quam (rimam)
inflavimus Spiritus nostri partem. Thus Beidh.


SURA1 LX.-SHE WHO IS TRIED [CX.]

MEDINA.-13 Versus

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O YE who believe! take not my foe2 and your foe for friends, shewing them
kindness, although they believe not that truth which hath come to you: they
drive forth the Apostles and yourselves because ye believe in God your Lord!
If ye go forth to fight on my way, and from a desire to please me, and shew
them kindness in private, I well know what ye conceal, and what ye discover!
Whoso doth this hath already gone astray from the even way.

If they meet with you they will prove your foes: hand and tongue will they
put forth for your hurt, and will desire that you become infidels again.

Neither your kindred nor your children shall at all avail you on the day of
the resurrection. A severance between you will it make! and your actions doth
God behold.

A good example had ye in Abraham,3 and in those who followed him, when they
said to their people, "Verily, we are clear of you, and of what ye worship
beside God: we renounce you: and between us and hath hatred and enmity sprung
up for ever, until ye believe in God alone." Yet imitate not the language of
Abraham to his Father, "I will pray for thy forgiveness, but not aught shall
I obtain for thee from God."4 O our Lord! in thee do we trust! to thee do we
turn! to thee we shall come back at the last.

O our Lord! expose us not for trial to the unbelievers, and forgive us: for
thou art the Mighty, the Wise!

A good example had ye in them, for all who hope in God and in the last day.
But let who will turn back, God truly is the Rich, the Praiseworthy!

God will, perhaps, establish good will between yourselves and those of them
whom ye take to be your enemies:5 God is Powerful: and God is Gracious,
Merciful.

God doth not forbid you to deal with kindness and fairness toward those who
have not made war upon you on account of your religion, or driven you forth
from your homes: for God loveth those who act with fairness.>Only doth God
forbid you to make friends of those who, on account of your religion, have
warred against you, and have driven you forth from your homes, and have aided
those who drove you forth: and whoever maketh friends of them are wrong-
doers.

O Believers!6 when believing women come over to you as refugees (Mohadjers),
then make TRIAL of them. God best knoweth their faith; but if ye have also
ascertained their faith, let them not go back to the infidels; they are not
lawful for them, nor are the unbelievers lawful for these women. But give
them back what they have spent for their dowers. No crime shall it be in you
to marry them, provided ye give them their dowers. Do not retain any right in
the infidel women, but demand back what you have spent for their dowers, and
let the unbelievers demand back what they have spent for their wives.7 This
is the ordinance of God which He ordaineth among you: and God is Knowing,
Wise.

And if any of your wives escape from you to the Infidels from whom ye
afterwards take any spoil, then give to those whose wives shall have fled
away, the like of what they shall have spent for their dowers; and fear God
in whom ye believe.

O Prophet! when believing women come to thee, and pledge themselves that they
will not associate aught with God, and that they will not steal or commit
adultery, nor kill their children, nor bring scandalous charges,8 nor disobey
thee in what is right, then plight thou thy faith to them, and ask pardon for
them of God: for God is Indulgent, Merciful!

O Believers! enter not into amity with those against whom God is angered;
they despair of the life to come, even as the Infidels despair of the inmates
of the tombs.


_______________________

1 Revealed probably as far as verse 9 (Ramadhan Hej. 8) shortly before the
taking of Mecca.

2 Haleb (?) Ben Abu Baltaa had informed the Koreisch of an intended surprise
of Mecca on the part of Muhammad, with the view of making terms for his own
family who had been left there. The offence was pardoned, but the revelation
was nevertheless published with the view of preventing similar acts of
treachery in future.

3 Speaking of the representatives of the different religious systems
prevalent in the Roman Empire, as Orpheus, Abraham, Christ, Apollonius of
Tyana, enshrined among the household deities of Alexander Severus, Mr. Milman
remarks (Hist. of Christianity, ii. p. 231) that "It is singular that
Abraham, rather than Moses, was placed at the head of Judaism: it is possible
that the traditionary sanctity which attached to the first parent of the
Jewish people, and of many of the Arab tribes, and which was afterwards
embodied in the Koran, was floating in the East, and would comprehend, as it
were, the opinions, not only of the Jews, but of a much wider circle of the
Syrian natives."

4 Sura [cxiii.] ix. 115.

5 That is, by their conversion hereafter.

6 Said (see N√∂ld. p. 163) to have been revealed at, or shortly after, the
peace of Hudaibiya. According to the terms then agreed upon, a mutual
restitution of property was to take place.

7 Who are converted to Islam.

8 Lit. with a calumny which they have devised between their hands and their
feet. Said to have been revealed at the taking of Mecca. Tab. Beidh.


SURA1 CX.-HELP [CXI.]

MEDINA.-3 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

WHEN the HELP of God and the victory arrive,

And thou seest men entering the religion of God by troops;

Then utter the praise of thy Lord, implore His pardon; for He loveth to turn
in mercy.


_______________________

1 This Sura was revealed at the taking of Mecca, and is supposed to have
given Muhammad warning of his death.


SURA XLIX.-THE APARTMENTS [CXII.]

MEDINA.-18 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O BELIEVERS! enter not upon any affair ere God and His Apostle1 permit you;
and fear ye God: for God Heareth, Knoweth.2

O Believers! raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet, neither
speak loud to him as ye speak loud one to another, lest your works come to
nought, and ye unaware of it.

They who lower their voices in the presence of the Apostle of God, are the
persons whose hearts God hath inclined to piety. Forgiveness shall be theirs
and a rich reward.

They who call out to thee while thou art within3 thine APARTMENTS, have most
of them no right perception of what is due to thee.

But if they wait patiently till thou come forth to them, it were far better
for them. But God is Indulgent, Merciful.

O Believers! if any bad man4 come to you with news, clear it up at once, lest
through ignorance ye harm others, and speedily have to repent of what ye have
done.

And know that an Apostle of God is among you! should he give way to you in
many matters ye would certainly become guilty of a crime. But God hath
endeared the faith to you, and hath given it favour in your hearts, and hath
made unbelief, and wickedness, and disobedience hateful to you. Such are they
who pursue a right course.

Through the bounty and grace which is from God: and God is Knowing, Wise.

If two bodies of the faithful are at war, then make ye peace between them:5
and if the one of them wrong the other, fight against that party which doth
the wrong, until they come back to the precepts of God: if they come back,
make peace between them with fairness, and act impartially; God loveth those
who act with impartiality.

Only the faithful are brethren; wherefore make peace between your brethren;
and fear God, that ye may obtain mercy.

O Believers! let not men laugh men to scorn who haply may be better than
themselves; neither let women laugh women to scorn who may haply be better
than themselves!6 Neither defame one another, nor call one another by
nicknames. Bad is it to be called wicked after having professed the faith:7
and whoso repent not of this are doers of wrong.

O Believers! avoid frequent suspicions, for some suspicions are a crime; and
pry not: neither let the one of you traduce another in his absence. Would any
one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Surely ye would loathe
it. And fear ye God: for God is Ready to turn, Merciful.

O men! verily, we have created you of a male and a female; and we have
divided you into peoples and tribes that ye might have knowledge one of
another. Truly, the most worthy of honour in the sight of God is he who
feareth Him most.8 Verily, God is Knowing, Cognisant.

The Arabs of the desert9 say, "We believe." Say thou: Ye believe not; but
rather say, "We profess Islam;" for the faith hath not yet found its way into
your hearts. But if ye obey God and His Apostle, he will not allow you to
lose any of your actions: for God is Indulgent, Merciful.

The true believers are those only who believe in God and His Apostle, and
afterwards doubt not; and who contend with their substance and their persons
on the path of God. These are the sincere.

SAY: Will ye teach God about your religion? when God knoweth whatever is in
the Heavens and on the Earth: yea, God hath knowledge of all things.

They taunt thee with their having embraced Islam.10 SAY: Taunt me not with
your having embraced Islam: God rather taunteth you with His having guided
you to the faith: acknowledge this if ye are sincere.

Verily, God knoweth the secrets of the Heavens and of the Earth: and God
beholdeth what ye do.


_______________________

1 Or anticipate not, take not the lead of God and His Apostle.

2 All the ancient Interpreters (as His. 933 ff., Ibn Sa'd. 320, Tab. Ag√¢n√≠.
116 f.-comp. also Weil 244 ff., Caussin, iii. 271) refer from 1-5 to the
disrespectful demeanour, in Muhammad's presence, of the envoys of the Banu
Tamim in Hej. 9 or 10.

3 Lit. from without.

4 The commentators mentioned in the last note, as well as others, explain
this verse of Al Walid ben Uqba, who had brought a false report of the
refusal of the Banu'lmustaliq to pay certain alms which Muhammad had sent him
to demand. This Al Walid became governor of Kufa under Othman. He probably
was never really converted to Islam.

5 Upon this passage 91-2, die Muslimen, says N√∂ldeke, verschiedene
Geschichten erz√§hlen, so dass sich Nichts sicher bestimmen I√§sst, p. 164.
This remark applies to the great mass of Muhammadan comment.

6 Said to refer to Safia, one of Muhammad's wives. who had been taunted by
his other wives with being a Jewess.

7 Lit. Bad the name, wickedness, after faith.

8 That is, not the most nobly born, like the Koreisch. This verse is said to
have been revealed in Mecca on the day of its conquest. See Weil, Leben,
p.372, and n.

9 The Ban≈± Asad had come to Medina in a year of famine to seek support for
themselves and families, and made profession of Islamism. Beidh.-Thus, also
Ibn Sad. Tabari. Wah.

10 As if by so doing they had conferred a favour on the Prophet.


SURA IX.1-IMMUNITY [CXIII.]

MEDINA.-130 Verses

An IMMUNITY from God and His Apostle to those with whom ye are in league,
among the Polytheist Arabs! (those who join gods with God).

Go ye, therefore, at large in the land four months: but know that God ye
shall not weaken;2 and that those who believe not, God will put to shame-

And a proclamation on the part of God and His Apostle to the people on the
day of the greater pilgrimage, that God is free from any engagement with the
votaries of other gods with God as is His Apostle! If, therefore, ye turn to
God it will be better for you; but if ye turn back, then know that ye shall
not weaken God: and to those who believe not, announce thou a grievous
punishment.

But this concerneth not those Polytheists with whom ye are in league, and who
shall have afterwards in no way failed you, nor aided anyone against you.
Observe, therefore, engagement with them through the whole time of their
treaty: for God loveth those who fear Him.

And when the sacred months3 are passed, kill those who join other gods with
God wherever ye shall find them; and seize them, besiege them, and lay wait
for them with every kind of ambush: but if they shall convert, and observe
prayer, and pay the obligatory alms, then let them go their way, for God is
Gracious, Merciful.

If any one of those who join gods with God ask an asylum of thee, grant him
an asylum, that he may hear the Word of God, and then let him reach his place
of safety. This, for that they are people devoid of knowledge.

How shall they who add gods to God be in league with God and with His
Apostle, save those with whom ye made a league at the sacred temple? So long
as they are true to you, be ye true to them; for God loveth those who fear
Him.

How can they? since if they prevail against you, they will not regard in you
either ties of blood or faith. With their mouths will they content you, but
their hearts will be averse. The greater part of them are perverse doers.

They sell the signs of God for a mean price, and turn others aside from his
way: evil is it that they do!

They regard not in a believer either ties of blood or faith; these are the
transgressors!

Yet if they turn to God and observe prayer, and pay the impost, then are they
your brethren in religion. We make clear our signs to those who understand.

But if, after alliance made, they break their oaths and revile your religion,
then do battle with the ring-leaders of infidelity-for no oaths are binding
with them that they may desist.

What! will ye not fight against those Meccans who have broken their oaths and
aimed to expel your Apostle, and attacked you first? Will ye dread them? God
is more worthy of your fear, if ye are believers!

So make war on them: By your hands will God chastise them, and will put them
to shame, and will give you victory over them, and will heal the bosoms of a
people who believe;

And will take away the wrath of their hearts. God will be turned unto whom He
will: and God is Knowing, Wise.

Think ye that ye shall be forsaken as if God did not yet know those among you
who do valiantly, and take none for their friends beside God, and His
Apostle, and the faithful? God is well apprised of your doings.

It is not for the votaries of other gods with God, witnesses against
themselves of infidelity, to visit the temples of God. These! vain their
works: and in the fire shall they abide for ever!

He only should visit the temples of God who believeth in God and the last
day, and observeth prayer, and payeth the legal alms, and dreadeth none but
God. These haply will be among the rightly guided.

Do ye place the giving drink to the pilgrims, and the visitation of the
sacred temple,4 on the same level with him who believeth in God and the last
day, and fighteth on the way of God? They shall not be held equal by God: and
God guideth not the unrighteous.

They who have believed, and fled their homes, and striven with their
substance and with their persons on the path of God, shall be of highest
grade with God: and these are they who shall be happy!

Tidings of mercy from Himself, and of His good pleasure, doth their Lord send
them, and of gardens in which lasting pleasure shall be theirs;

Therein shall they abide for ever; for God! with Him is a great reward.

O Believers! make not friends of your fathers or your brethren if they love
unbelief above faith: and whoso of you shall make them his friends, will be
wrong doers.

SAY: If your fathers, and your sons, and your brethren, and your wives, and
your kindred, and the wealth which ye have gained, and merchandise which ye
fear may be unsold, and dwellings wherein ye delight, be dearer to you than
God and His Apostle and efforts on his Path, then wait until God shall
Himself enter on His work:5 and God guideth not the impious.

Now hath God helped you in many battlefields, and, on the day of Honein,6
when ye prided yourselves on your numbers; but it availed you nothing; and
the earth, with all its breadth, became too straight for you:7 then turned ye
your backs in flight:

Then did God send down His spirit of repose8 upon His Apostle, and upon the
faithful, and He sent down the hosts which ye saw not, and He punished the
Infidels: This, the Infidels' reward!

Yet, after this, will God be turned to whom He pleaseth; for God is Gracious,
Merciful!

O Believers! only they who join gods with God are unclean! Let them not,
therefore, after this their year, come near the sacred Temple. And if ye fear
want,9 God, if He please, will enrich you of His abundance: for God is
Knowing, Wise.

Make war upon such of those to whom the Scriptures have been given as believe
not in God, or in the last day, and who forbid not that which God and His
Apostle have forbidden, and who profess not the profession of the truth,
until they pay tribute out of hand,10 and they be humbled.11

The Jews say, "Ezra (Ozair) is a son of God";12 and the Christians say, "The
Messiah is a son of God." Such the sayings in their mouths! They resemble the
saying of the Infidels of old! God do battle with them! How are they
misguided!

They take their teachers, and their monks, and the Messiah, son of Mary, for
Lords13 beside God, though bidden to worship one God only. There is no God
but He! Far from His glory be what they associate with Him!

Fain would they put out God's light with their mouths: but God only desireth
to perfect His light, albeit the Infidels abhor it.

He it is who hath sent His Apostle with the Guidance and a religion of the
truth, that He may make it victorious14 over every other religion, albeit
they who assign partners to God be averse from it.

O Believers! of a truth, many of the teachers and monks do devour man's
substance in vanity, and turn them from the Way of God. But to those who
treasure up gold and silver and expend it not in the Way of God, announce
tidings of a grievous torment.

On that day their treasures shall be heated in hell fire, and their
foreheads, and their sides, and their backs, shall be branded with them. . .
. "This is what ye have treasured up for yourselves: taste, therefore, your
treasures!"

Twelve months is the number of months with God,15 according to God's book,
since the day when He created the Heavens and the Earth: of these four are
sacred: this is the right usage: But wrong not yourselves therein; attack
those who join gods with God in all, as they attack you in all: and know that
God is with those who fear Him.

To carry over a sacred month to another, is only a growth of infidelity. The
Infidels are led into error by it. They allow it one year, and forbid it
another, that they may make good the number of months which God hath
hallowed, and they allow that which God hath prohibited. The evil of their
deeds hath been prepared for them by Satan: for God guideth not the people
who do not believe.

O Believers! what possessed you, that when it was said to you, "March forth
on the Way of God," ye sank heavily earthwards? What! prefer ye the life of
this world to the next? But the fruition of this mundane life, in respect of
that which is to come, is but little.16

Unless ye march forth, with a grievous chastisement will He chastise you; and
He will place another people in your stead, and ye shall in no way harm Him:
for over everything is God potent.

If ye assist not your Prophet . . . God assisted him formerly, when the
unbelievers drove him forth, in company with a second only!17 when they two
were in the cave; when the Prophet said to his companion, "Be not distressed;
verily, God is with us." And God sent down His tranquillity upon him, and
strengthened him with hosts ye saw not, and made the word of those who
believed not the abased, and the word of God was the exalted: for God is
Mighty, Wise.

March ye forth the light and heavy armed,18 and contend with your substance
and your persons on the Way of God. This, if ye know it, will be better for
you.

Had there been a near advantage and a short journey, they would certainly
have followed thee; but the way seemed long to them.19 Yet will they swear by
God, "Had we been able, we had surely gone forth with you:" they are self-
destroyers! And God knoweth that they are surely liars!

God forgive thee! Why didst thou give them leave to stay behind, ere they who
make true excuses had become known to thee, and thou hadst known the liars?

They who believe in God and in the last day will not ask leave of thee to be
exempt from contending with their substance and their persons. But God
knoweth those who fear Him!

They only will ask thy leave who believe not in God and the last day, and
whose hearts are full of doubts, and who are tossed up and down in their
doubtings.

Moreover, had they been desirous to take the field, they would have got ready
for that purpose the munitions of war.20  But God was averse to their
marching forth, and made them laggards; and it was said, "Sit ye at home with
those who sit."

Had they taken the field with you, they would only have added a burden to
you, and have hurried about among you, stirring you up to sedition; and some
there are among you who would have listened to them: and God knoweth the evil
doers.

Of old aimed they at sedition, and deranged thy affairs, until the truth
arrived, and the behest of God became apparent, averse from it though they
were.

Some of them say to thee, "Allow me to remain at home, and expose me not to
the trial." Have they not fallen into a trial already? But verily, Hell shall
environ the Infidels!

If a success betide thee, it annoyeth them: but if a reverse betide thee,
they say, "We took our own measures before:" and they turn their backs and
are glad.

SAY: Nothing can befall us but what God hath destined21 for us. Our liege-
lord is He; and on God let the faithful trust!

SAY: Await ye for us, other than one of the two best things?22 But we await
for you the infliction of a chastisement by God, from himself, or at our
hands. Wait ye then; we verily will wait with you.

SAY: Make ye your offerings willingly or by constraint; it cannot be accepted
from you, because ye are a wicked people:

And nothing hindreth the acceptance of their offerings, but that they believe
not in God and His Apostle, and discharge not the duty of prayer but with
sluggishness, and make not offerings but with reluctance.

Let not, therefore, their riches or their children amaze thee. God is only
minded to punish them by means of these, in this life present, and that their
souls may depart while they are unbelievers.23

And they swear by God that they are indeed of you, yet they are not of you,
but they are people who are afraid of you:

If they find a place of refuge, or caves, or a hiding place, they assuredly
turn towards it and haste thereto.

Some of them also defame thee in regard to the alms; yet if a part be given
them, they are content, but if no part be given them, behold, they are angry!

Would that they were satisfied with that which God and His Apostle had given
them, and would say "God sufficeth us! God will vouchsafe unto us of His
favour, and so will His Apostle: verily unto God do we make our suit!"

But alms are only to be given to the poor and the needy,24 and those who
collect them, and to those25 whose hearts are won to Islam, and for ransoms,
and for debtors, and for the cause of God, and the wayfarer. This is an
ordinance from God: and God is Knowing, Wise.

There are some of them who injure26 the Prophet and say, "He is all ear."
Say: An ear of good to you! He believeth in God, and believeth the believers:
and is a mercy to such of you as believe:

But they who injure the Apostle of God, shall suffer a dolorous chastisement.

They swear to you by God to please you; but worthier is God, and His Apostle,
that they should please Him, if they are believers.

Know they not, that for him who opposeth God and His Apostle, is surely the
fire of Hell, in which he shall remain for ever? This is the great ignominy!

The hypocrites are afraid lest a Sura should be sent down concerning them, to
tell them plainly what is in their hearts.  SAY: Scoff ye; but God will bring
to light that which ye are afraid of.

And if thou question them, they will surely say, "We were only discoursing
and jesting." SAY: What! do ye scoff at God, and His signs, and His Apostle?

Make no excuse: from faith ye have passed to infidelity! If we forgive some
of you, we will punish others: for that they have been evil doers.

Hypocritical men and women imitate one another.27 They enjoin what is evil,
and forbid what is just, and shut up their hands.28 They have forgotten God,
and He hath forgotten them. Verily, the hypocrites are the perverse doers.

God promiseth the hypocritical men and women, and the unbelievers, the fire
of Hell-therein shall they abide-this their sufficing portion! And God hath
cursed them, and a lasting torment shall be theirs.

Ye act like those who flourished before you. Mightier were they than you in
prowess, and more abundant in wealth and children, and they enjoyed their
portion: so ye also enjoy your portion, as they who were before you enjoyed
theirs; and ye hold discourses like their discourses. These! vain their works
both for this world and for that which is to come! These! they are the lost
ones.

Hath not the history reached them of those who were before them?-of the
people of Noah,29 and of Ad, and of Themoud, and of the people of Abraham,
and of the inhabitants of Madian, and of the overthrown cities? Their
apostles came to them with clear proofs of their mission: God would not deal
wrongly by them, but they dealt wrongly by themselves.

The faithful of both sexes are mutual friends: they enjoin what is just, and
forbid what is evil; they observe prayer, and pay the legal impost, and they
obey God and His Apostle. On these will God have mercy: verily, God is
Mighty, Wise.

To the faithful, both men and women, God promiseth gardens 'neath which the
rivers flow, in which they shall abide, and goodly mansions in the gardens of
Eden. But best of all will be God's good pleasure in them. This will be the
great bliss.

O Prophet! contend against the infidels and the hypocrites, and be rigorous
with them: Hell shall be their dwelling place! Wretched the journey thither!

They swear by God that they said no such thing: yet spake they the word of
infidelity, and from Muslims became unbelievers! They planned what they could
not effect;30 and only disapproved of it because God and His Apostle had
enriched them by His bounty! If they repent it will be better for them; but
if they fall back into their sin, with a grievous chastisement will God
chastise them in this world and the next, and on earth they shall have
neither friend nor protector!

Some there are of them who made this agreement with God-"If truly He give us
of His bounties, we will surely give alms and surely be of the righteous."

Yet when he had vouchsafed them of His bounty, they became covetous thereof,
and turned their backs, and withdrew afar off:

So He caused hypocrisy to take its turn in their hearts, until the day on
which they shall meet Him-for that they failed their promise to God, and that
they were liars!

Know they not that God knoweth their secrets and their private talk, and that
God knoweth the secret things?

They who traduce such of the faithful as give their alms freely, and those
who find nothing to give but their earnings, and scoff at them, God shall
scoff at them; and there is a grievous torment in store for them.

Ask thou forgiveness for them, or ask it not, it will be the same. If thou
ask forgiveness for them seventy times, God will by no means forgive them.
This, for that they believe not in God and His Apostle! And God guideth not
the ungodly people.

They who were left at home were delighted to stay behind God's Apostle, and
were averse from contending with their riches and their persons for the cause
of God, and said, "March not out in the heat." SAY: A fiercer heat will be
the fire of Hell." Would that they understood this.

Little, therefore, let them laugh, and much let them weep, as the meed of
their doings!

If God bring thee back from the fight to some of them, and they ask thy leave
to take the field, SAY: By no means shall ye ever take the field with me, and
by no means shall ye fight an enemy with me: ye were well pleased to sit at
home at the first crisis: sit ye at home, then, with those who lag behind.

Never pray thou over anyone of them who dieth, or stand at his grave31-
because they believed not in God and His Apostle, and died in their
wickedness.

Let not their riches or their children astonish thee: through these God is
fain only to punish them in this world, and that their souls should depart
while they are still infidels.

When a Sura was sent down with "Believe in God and go forth to war with His
Apostle," those of them who are possessed of riches demanded exemption, and
said, "Allow us to be with those who sit at home.

Well content were they to be with those who stay behind: for a seal hath been
set on their hearts so that they understand not:-

But the Apostle and those who share his faith, contend for the faith with
purse and person; and these! all good things await them: and these are they
who shall be happy.

God hath made ready for them gardens 'neath which the rivers flow, wherein
they shall remain for ever: this will be the great bliss.

Some Arabs of the desert came with excuses, praying exemption; and they who
had gainsaid God and His Apostle sat at home: a grievous punishment shall
light on such of them as believe not.

It shall be no crime in the weak, and in the sick, and in those who find not
the means of contributing, to stay at home, provided they are sincere with
God and His Apostle. Against those who act virtuously, there is no cause of
blame: and God is Gracious, Merciful:-

Nor against those, to whom when they came to thee that thou shouldst mount
them, thou didst say "I find not wherewith to mount you," and they turned
away their eyes shedding floods of tears for grief, because they found no
means to contribute.

Only is there cause of blame against those who, though they are rich, ask
thee for exemption. They are pleased to be with those who stay behind; and
God hath set a seal upon their hearts: they have no knowledge.

They will excuse themselves to you when ye come back to them. SAY: Excuse
yourselves not; we cannot believe you: now hath God informed us about you:
God will behold your doings, and so will His Apostle: to Him who knoweth
alike things hidden and things manifest shall ye hereafter be brought back:
and He will tell you what ye have done.

They will adjure you by God when ye are come back to them, to withdraw from
them: Withdraw from them, then, for they are unclean: their dwelling shall be
Hell, in recompense for their deserts.

They will adjure you to take pleasure in them; but if ye take pleasure in
them, God truly will take no pleasure in those who act corruptly.

The Arabs of the desert are most stout in unbelief and dissimulation; and
likelier it is that they should be unaware of the laws which God hath sent
down to His Apostle: and God is Knowing, Wise.

Of the Arabs of the desert there are some who reckon what they expend in the
cause of God as tribute, and wait for some change of fortune to befall you: a
change for evil shall befall them! God is the Hearer, the Knower.

And of the Arabs of the desert, some believe in God and in the last day, and
deem those alms an approach to God and to the Apostle's prayers. Are they not
their approach? Into His mercy shall God lead them: yes, God is Indulgent,
Merciful.

As for those who led the way, the first of the Mohadjers,32 and the Ansars,
and those who have followed their noble conduct, God is well pleased with
them, and they with Him: He hath made ready for them gardens under whose
trees the rivers flow: to abide therein for aye: this shall be the great
bliss:

And of the Arabs of the desert round about you, some are hypocrites: and of
the people of Medina, some are stubborn in hypocrisy. Thou knowest them not,
Muhammad: we know them: twice33 will we chastise them: then shall they be
given over to a great chastisement.

Others have owned their faults, and with an action that is right they have
mixed another that is wrong. God will haply be turned to them: for God is
Forgiving, Merciful.

Take alms of their substance,34 that thou mayst cleanse and purify them
thereby, and pray for them; for thy prayers shall assure their minds: and God
Heareth, Knoweth.

Know they not that when his servants turn to Him with repentance, God
accepteth it, and that He accepteth alms, and that God is He who turneth, the
Merciful?

SAY: Work ye: but God will behold your work, and so will His Apostle, and the
faithful: and ye shall be brought before Him who knoweth alike the Hidden and
the Manifest, and He will tell you of all your works.

And others await the decision of God; whether He will punish them, or whether
He will be turned unto them: but God is Knowing, Wise.

There are some35 who have built a Mosque for mischief36 and for infidelity,
and to disunite the faithful, and in expectation of him37 who, in time past,
warred against God and His Apostle. They will surely swear, "Our aim was only
good:" but God is witness that they are liars.

Never set thou foot in it.38 There is a Mosque39 founded from its first day
in piety. More worthy is it that thou enter therein: therein are men who
aspire to purity, and God loveth the purified.

Which of the two is best? He who hath founded his building on the fear of God
and the desire to please Him, or he who hath founded his building on the
brink of an undermined bank washed away by torrents, so that it rusheth with
him into the fire of Hell? But God guideth not the doers of wrong.

Their building which they40 have built will not cease to cause uneasiness in
their hearts, until their hearts are cut in pieces.41 God is Knowing, Wise.

Verily, of the faithful hath God bought their persons and their substance, on
condition of Paradise for them in return: on the path of God shall they
fight, and slay, and be slain: a Promise for this is pledged in the Law, and
in the Evangel, and in the Koran-and who more faithful, in to his engagement
than God? Rejoice, therefore, in the contract that ye have contracted: for
this shall be the great bliss.

Those who turn to God, and those who serve, who praise, who fast, who bow
down, who prostrate themselves, who enjoin what is just and forbid what is
evil, and keep to the bounds42 of God . . .43 Wherefore bear these good
tidings to the faithful.

It is not for the prophet or the faithful to pray for the forgiveness of
those, even though they be of kin, who associate other beings with God, after
it hath been made clear to them that they are to be the inmates of Hell.

For neither did Abraham ask forgiveness for his father, but in pursuance of a
promise which he had promised to him: but when it was shewn him that he was
an enemy to God, he declared himself clear of him. Yet Abraham was pitiful,
kind.

Nor is it for God to lead a people into error, after he hath guided them
aright, until that which they ought to dread hath been clearly shewn them.
Verily, God knoweth all things.

God! His the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth! He maketh alive and
killeth! Ye have no patron or helper save God.

Now hath God turned Him unto the Prophet and unto the refugees (Mohadjers),
and unto the helpers (Ansars)44, who followed him in the hour of distress,
after that the hearts of a part of them had well nigh failed them45. Then
turned He unto them, for He was Kind to them, Merciful.

He hath also turned Him unto the three46 who were left behind, so that the
earth, spacious as it is, became too strait for them; and their souls became
so straitened within them, that they bethought them that there was no refuge
from God but unto Himself. Then was He turned to them, that they might be
turned to Him, for God is He that turneth, the Merciful.

Believers!47 fear God, and be with the sincere.

No cause had the people of Medina and the Arabs of the desert around them, to
abandon God's Apostle, or to prefer their own lives to his; because neither
thirst, nor the labour nor hunger, could come upon them when on path of
God;48 neither do they step a step which may anger the unbelievers, neither
do they receive from the enemy any damage, but it is written down to them as
a good work. Verily, God suffereth not the reward of the righteous to perish.

Nor give they alms either small or great, nor traverse they a torrent, but it
is thus reckoned to them; that God may reward them with better than they have
wrought.

The faithful must not march forth all together to the wars: and if a party of
every band of them march not out, it is that they may instruct themselves in
their religion, and may warn their people when they come back to them, that
they take heed to themselves.

Believers! wage war against such of the infidels as are your neighbours, and
let them find you rigorous: and know that God is with those who fear him.

Whenever a Sura is sent down, there are some of them who say, "Whose faith
hath it increased?" It will increase the faith of those who believe, and they
shall rejoice.

But as to those in whose hearts is a disease, it will add doubt to their
doubt, and they shall die infidels.

Do they not see that they are proved every year once or twice? Yet they turn
not, neither are they warned.

And whenever a Sura is sent down, they look at one another. . . .  "Doth any
one see you?" then turn they aside. God shall turn their hearts aside,
because they are a people devoid of understanding.

Now hath an Apostle come unto you from among yourselves: your iniquities
press heavily upon him. He is careful over you, and towards the faithful,
compassionate, merciful.

If they turn away, SAY: God sufficeth me: there is no God but He. In Him put
I my trust. He is the possessor of the Glorious Throne!


_______________________

1 The "Immunity" is said by some commentators to have formed originally one
Sura with the eighth, p.375, and that on this account the usual formula of
invocation is not prefixed. The Caliph Othman accounted for this omission of
the Bismillah from the fact of this Sura having been revealed, with the
exception of a few verses, shortly before the prophet's death, who left no
instructions on the subject. (Mishcat 1, p. 526.) The former verses from 1-
12, or, according to other traditions, from 1-40, were recited to the
pilgrims at Mecca by Ali, Ann. Hej. 9.

2 Lit. that ye cannot weaken God.

3 Shaw√¢l, Dhu'lkaada, Dhu'lhajja, Muharram. These months were observed by the
Arabians previous to the time of Muhammad.

4 Al Abbas, Muhammad's uncle, when taken prisoner, had defended his unbelief,
and declared that he had performed these two important duties. Beidh.

5 Or, shall issue his behest.

6 At the battle of Honein, a valley three miles from Mecca (A.H. 8), the
Muhammadans, presuming upon the great superiority of their numbers, 12,000
men, over the enemy who were only 4000 strong, were seized with a panic
throughout their ranks. Order was restored and victory obtained through the
bravery and presence of mind of Muhammad and his kindred.

7 The enemy attacked and routed you on all sides.

8 See ii. 249, p. 365.

9 Through the breaking off commercial relations.

10 Or, by right of subjection, Sale; in cash, Wahl.; all without exception,
K. i.e. as if by counting hands.

11 Thus Hilchoth Melachim, vi. 4. The Jews are commanded, in case of war with
the Gentiles, to offer peace on two conditions:-that they become tributaries,
and renounce idolatry. Thus also chap. viii. 4.

12 The Muhammadan tradition is that Ezra was raised to life after he had been
100 years dead, and dictated from memory the whole Jewish law, which had been
lost during the captivity, to the scribes. That the Jews regarded Ezra as a
son of God is due to Muhammad's own invention. See Sonna, 462 v. H. v.
Purgstall's Fundgruben des Orients, i. 288. The Talmudists, however, use very
exaggerated language concerning him. Thus, Sanhedrin, 21, 22. "Ezra would
have been fully worthy to have been the lawgiver, if Moses had not preceded
him." Josephus, Ant. xi. 5, 5, speaks of his high repute ([greek text]) with
the people, and of his honourable burial. Muhammad probably represents the
Jews as having deified Ezra with the view of showing that they, as well as
the Christians, had tampered with the doctrine of the Divine unity.

13 An allusion to the word Rabbi, used by Jews and Christians, of their
priests, etc., but in Arabic of God only. Comp. Matt. xxiii. 7, 8.

14 See Sur. [cxiv.] v. 85.

15 The intercalation of a month every third year, in order to reduce the
lunar to the solar years, is justified by the Muhammadans from this passage.

16 See Sur. xiii. 26, p. 336 (n.).

17 With Abubekr. lit. second of two.

18 Wahk. reich oder arm. Savary, young or old. Ibn Hisam (924) pronounces
this to be the oldest verse of the Sura.

19 This refers to the expedition of Tabouk, a town half-way between Medina
and Damascus, against the Greeks, A.H. 9. Muhammad was now at the head of an
army of 30,000 men. Verses 42-48 are said to have been revealed during the
march.

20 Lit. prepared a preparation.

21 Lit. written.

22 That is, victory or martyrdom.

23 Compare Sura iii. 172. Geiger, p. 76, shews that this is precisely the
teaching of the Talmudists with regard to the wicked.

24 The poor, i.e. absolute paupers; the needy i.e. those in some temporary
distress.

25 The petty Arab chiefs with whom Muhammad made terms after the battle of
Honein, in order to secure their followers.

26 There seems to be a play, in the original, upon the similarity of the
words for injure and ear.

27 Lit. (are) the one from the other.

28 From giving alms.

29 Comp. Sura liv. 15, p. 77. The traditions as to the collection of pitch
from wood of the Ark, in the time of Berosus (B.C. 250?) for amulets, and of
the wood itself, in the time of Josephus (Ant. i. 3, 6, c. Apion, i. 19) must
have reached Muhammad through his Jewish informants. Fragments are said to
have existed in the days of Benjamin of Tudela, and to have been carried away
by the Chalif Omar, from the mountain al Djoudi to the mosque of Gazyrat Ibn
Omar.

30 To kill Muhammad. The circumstances are given in a tradition preserved ap.
Weil, p. 265, note. The meaning is, that the people of Medina, who had become
enriched by Muhammad's residence among them, had no better motive for
disapproving the attempt upon his life. Lit. they had nothing to avenge but
that, etc.

31 Prayers for the dead were customary among the Arabians before Muhammad.
See Freyt. Einl. p. 221.

32 The Mohadiers were those who fled with Muhammad from Mecca to Medina, the
Ansars his auxiliaries in Medina.

33 The commentators are not agreed as to the nature of this double
punishment.

34 The fine of a third part of all their substance was imposed upon seven of
those who had held back from the expedition to Tabouk. This is the fault
spoken of in the preceding verse.

35 The tribe of Beni Ganim had built a mosque, professedly from religious
motives, which they invited Muhammad on his way to Tabouk to dedicate by a
solemn act of prayer. Muhammad, however, discovered that the real motive of
the Beni Ganim was jealousy of the tribe of Beni Amru Ibn Auf, and of the
mosque at Kuba, and that there existed and understanding between them and his
enemy the monk Abu Amir, who was then in Syria, for the purpose of urging the
Greeks to attack the Muslims and their mosque. It is to him that the word
irs√¢dan refers.

36 To the dwellers at Kuba. Verses 108-111 were probably promulged on the
return from Tabouk previous to the entry into Medina.

37 Abu Amir.

38 Or, never stand thou in it (to pray).

39 The mosque of Kuba, about three miles S.S.E. of Medina. The spot where
this verse was revealed is still pointed out, and called "Makam el Ayat," or
"the place of signs." Burton's "Pilgrimage," ii. p. 214.Muhammad laid the
first brick, and it was the first place of public prayer in El Islam. Ib. p.
209.

40 The Beni Ganim.

41 That is, up to the time of their death they will never reflect on what
they have done without bitter pangs of conscience. See Weil's M. der Prophet,
pp. 268, 269, and note.

42 Lit. limits, i.e. laws.

43 Shall have their recompense.

44 See verse 101.

45 Lit. turned aside, swerved.

46 Three Ansars who did not accompany Muhammad to Tabouk, and who on his
return were put under interdict, and not released from it till after fifty
days of penance.

47 Verses 120-128 probably belong to the period after the return from Tabouk
to Medina.

48 While fighting for the cause of God.


SURA V.-THE TABLE [CXIV.]

MEDINA.-120 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O BELIEVERS! be faithful to your engagements. You are allowed the flesh of
cattle other than what is hereinafter recited, except game, which is not
allowed you while ye are on pilgrimage. Verily, God ordaineth what he
pleaseth.

O Believers! violate neither the rites of God, nor the sacred month Muharram,
nor the offering, nor its ornaments1, nor those who press on to the sacred
house seeking favour from their Lord and his good pleasure in them.

But when all is over2, then take to the chase: and let not ill will at those3
who would have kept you from the sacred mosque lead you to transgress4, but
rather be helpful to one another according to goodness and piety, but be not
helpful for evil and malice: and fear ye God. Verily, God is severe in
punishing!

That which dieth of itself, and blood, and swine's flesh, and all that hath
been sacrificed under the invocation of any other name than that of God, and
the strangled, and the killed by a blow, or by a fall, or by goring5, and
that which hath been eaten by beasts of prey, unless ye make it clean by
giving the death-stroke yourselves, and that which hath been sacrificed on
the blocks of stone6, is forbidden you: and to make division of the slain by
consulting the arrows,7 is impiety in you. Woe this day on those who forsake
your religion! And fear them not, but fear Me.

This day have I perfected your religion for you, and have filled up the
measure of my favours upon you: and it is my pleasure that Islam be your
religion; but whoso without wilful leanings to wrong shall be forced by
hunger to transgress, to him,verily, will God be Indulgent, Merciful.

They will ask thee what is made lawful for them. Say: Those things which are
good8 are legalised to you, and the prey of beasts of chase which ye have
trained like dogs, teaching them as God hath taught you. Eat, therefore, of
what they shall catch for you, and make mention of the name of God over it,
and fear God: Verily, Swift is God to reckon:

This day, things healthful are legalised to you, and the meats of those who
have received the Scriptures are allowed to you, as your meats are to them.
And you are permitted to marry virtuous women who are believers, and virtuous
women of those who have received the Scriptures before you, when you shall
have provided them their portions, living chastely with them without
fornication, and without taking concubines. Vain the works of him who shall
renounce the faith! and in the next world he shall be of the lost.

O Believers! when ye address yourselves to prayer, wash your faces, and your
hands up to the elbow, and wipe your heads, and your feet to the ankles.

And if ye have become unclean, then purify yourselves. But if ye are sick, or
on a journey, or if one of you come from the place of retirement, or if ye
have touched women, and ye find no water, then take clean sand and rub your
faces and your hands with it.9 God desireth not to lay a burden upon you, but
he desireth to purify you, and He would fill up the measure of His favour
upon you, that ye may be grateful.

And remember the favour of God upon you, and His covenant which He hath
covenanted with you, when ye said, "We have heard and will obey;"10 and fear
God; verily, God knoweth the very secrets of the breast.

O Believers! stand up as witnesses for God by righteousness: and let not ill-
will at any, induce you not to act uprightly. Act uprightly. Next will this
be to the fear of God. And fear ye God: verily, God is apprised of what ye
do.

God hath promised to those who believe, and do the things that are right,
that for them is pardon and a great reward.

But they who are Infidels and treat our signs as lies-these shall be mated
with Hell fire.

O Believers! recollect God's favour upon you, when11 certain folk were minded
to stretch forth their hands against you, but He kept their hands from you.
Fear God then: and on God let the faithful trust.

Of old did God accept the covenant of the children of Israel,12 and out of
them we raised up twelve leaders, and God said, "Verily, I will be with you.
If ye observe prayer and pay the obligatory alms, and believe in my Apostles
and help them, and lend God a liberal loan, I will surely put away from you
your evil deeds, and I will bring you into gardens 'neath which the rivers
flow! But whoso of you after this believeth not, hath gone astray from the
even path."

But for their breaking their covenant we have cursed them, and have hardened
their hearts. They shift the words of Scripture from their places, and have
forgotten part of what they were taught. Thou wilt not cease to discover
deceit on their part, except in a few of them. But forgive them, and pass it
over: verily, God loveth those who act generously!

And of those who say, "We are Christians," have we accepted the covenant. But
they too have forgotten a part of what they were taught; wherefore we have
stirred up enmity and hatred among them that shall last till the day of the
Resurrection; and in the end will God tell them of their doings.

O people of the Scriptures! now is our Apostle come to you to clear up to you
much that ye concealed of those Scriptures, and to pass over many things. Now
hath a light and a clear Book come to you from God, by which God will guide
him who shall follow after his good pleasure, to paths of peace, and will
bring them out of the darkness to the light, by his will: and to the straight
path will he guide them.

Infidels now are they who say, "Verily God is the Messiah Ibn Maryam (son of
Mary)! SAY: And who could aught obtain from God, if he chose to destroy the
Messiah Ibn Maryam, and his mother, and all who are on the earth together?

For with God is the sovereignty of the Heavens and of the Earth, and of all
that is between them! He createth what He will; and over all things is God
potent.

Say the Jews and Christians, "Sons are we of God and his beloved." SAY: Why
then doth he chastise you for your sins? Nay! ye are but a part of the men
whom he hath created! He will pardon whom he pleaseth, and chastise whom he
pleaseth, and with God is the sovereignty of the Heavens and of the Earth,
and of all that is between them, and unto Him shall all things return.

O people of the Book! now hath our Apostle come to you to clear up to you the
cessation13 of Apostles, lest you should say, "There hath come to us no
bearer of good tidings, nor any warner." But now hath a bearer of good
tidings and a warner reached you. And God is Almighty.

And remember when Moses said to his people, "O my people! call to mind the
goodness of God towards you when he appointed Prophets among you, and
appointed you kings, and gave you what never had been given before to any
human beings:

Enter, O my people! the holy land which God hath destined for you. Turn not
back, lest ye be overthrown to your ruin."

They said, "O Moses! Therein are men of might. And verily, we can by no means
enter it till they be gone forth. But if they go forth from it, then verily
will we enter in."

Then said two men of those who feared their Lord and to whom God had been
gracious, "Enter in upon them by the gate: and when ye enter it, ye overcome!
If ye be believers, put ye your trust in God."

They said, "O Moses! never can we enter while they remain therein. Go thou
and thy Lord and fight; for here will we sit us down."

He said, "O my Lord, Verily of none am I master but of myself and my brother:
put thou therefore a difference between us and this ungodly people."

He said, "Verily the land shall be forbidden them forty years: they shall
wander in the earth perplexed. Fret not thyself therefore for the ungodly
people."

Relate to them exactly the story of the sons of Adam14 when they each offered
an offering; accepted from the one of them, and not accepted from the other.
The one said, "I will surely slay thee." Said the other, "God only accepted
from those that fear Him.

"Even if thou stretch forth thine hand against me to slay me, I will not
stretch forth my hand against thee to slay thee. Truly I fear God the Lord of
the Worlds.

"Yea, rather would I that thou shouldest bear my sin15 and thine own sin, and
that thou become an inmate of the Fire: for that is the recompense of the
unjust doers."

And his passion led him to slay his brother: and he slew him; and he became
one of those who perish.

And God sent a raven which scratched upon the ground, to shew him16 how he
might hide his brother's wrong.17 He said: "O woe is me! am I too weak to
become like this raven, and to hide away my brother's wrong?" And he became
one of the repentant.

For this cause have we ordained to the children of Israel that he who slayeth
any one, unless it be a person guilty of manslaughter, or of spreading
disorders in the land, shall be as though he had slain all mankind; but that
he who saveth a life, shall be as though he had saved all mankind alive.18

Of old our Apostles came to them with the proofs of their mission; then
verily after this most of them committed excesses in the land.

Only, the recompense of those who war against God and his Apostle, and go
about to commit disorders on the earth, shall be that they shall be slain or
crucified, or have their alternate hands and feet cut off, or be banished the
land: This their disgrace in this world, and in the next a great torment
shall be theirs-

Except those who, ere you have them in your power, shall repent; for know
that God is Forgiving, Merciful.

O ye who believe! fear God. Desire union with Him. Contend earnestly on his
path, that you may attain to happiness.

As to the infidels-if that they had twice the riches of the earth to be their
ransom from torment on the day of resurrection, it should not be accepted
from them! And a dolorous torment shall be their's.

Fain would they come forth from the Fire; but forth from it they shall not
come: and a lasting torment shall be their's.

As to the thief, whether man or woman, cut ye off their hands in recompense
for their doings.19 This is a penalty by way of warning from God himself. And
God is Mighty, Wise.

But whoever shall turn him to God after this his wickedness, and amend, God
truly will be turned to him: for God is Forgiving, Merciful.

Knowest thou not that the sovereignty of the Heavens and of the Earth is
God's? He chastiseth whom He will, and whom He will He forgiveth. And God
hath power over all things.

O Apostle! let not those who vie with one another in speeding to infidelity
vex thee;-of those who say with their mouths, "We believe," but whose hearts
believe not;-or of the Jews listeners to a lie-listeners to others-but who
come not to thee. They shift the words of the law from their places, and say,
"If this be brought to you, receive it; but if this be not brought to you,
then beware of it." For him whom God would mislead, thou canst in no wise
prevail with God! They whose hearts God shall not please to cleanse, shall
suffer disgrace in this world, and in the next a grievous punishment;

Listeners to a falsehood and greedy devourers of the forbidden!20 If,
therefore, they have recourse to thee, then judge between them, or withdraw
from them. If thou withdraw from them, then can they have no power to injure
thee. But if thou judge, then judge between them with equity. Verily, God
loveth those who deal equitably.

But how shall they make thee their judge, since they possess already the Law,
in which are the behests of God, and have not obeyed it? After this, they
will turn their backs; but such are not believers.

Verily, we have sent down the law (Towrat) wherein are guidance and light. By
it did the prophets who professed Islam judge the Jews; and the doctors and
the teachers judged by that portion of the Book of God, of which they were
the keepers and the witnesses. Therefore, O Jews! fear not men but fear Me;
and barter not away my signs for a mean price! And whoso will not judge by
what God hath sent down-such are the Infidels.

And therein21 have we enacted for them, "Life for life, and eye for eye, and
nose for nose, and ear for ear, and tooth for tooth, and for wounds
retaliation:"-Whoso shall compromise it as alms shall have therein the
expiation of his sin; and whoso will not judge by what God hath sent down-
such are the transgressors.

And in the footsteps of the prophets caused we Jesus, the son of Mary, to
follow, confirming the law which was before him: and we gave him the Evangel
with its guidance and light, confirmatory of the preceding Law; a guidance
and warning to those who fear God;-

And that the people of the Evangel may judge according to what God hath sent
down therein. And whoso will not judge by what God hath sent down-such are
the perverse.

And to thee we have sent down the Book of the Koran with truth, confirmatory
of previous Scriptures, and their safeguard. Judge therefore between them by
what God hath sent down, and follow not their desires by deserting the truth
which hath come unto thee. To every one of you have we given a rule and a
beaten track.

And if God had pleased He had surely made you all one people; but He would
test you by what He hath given to each. Be emulous, then, in good deeds. To
God shall ye all return, and He will tell you concerning the subjects of your
disputes.

Wherefore do thou judge between them, by what God hath sent down, and follow
not their wishes! but be on thy guard against them lest they beguile thee
from any of those precepts which God hath sent down to thee; and if they turn
back, then know thou that for some of their crimes doth God choose to punish
them: for truly most men are perverse.

Desire they, therefore, the judgments of the times of(pagan) ignorance? But
what better judge can there be than God for those who believe firmly?

O Believers! take not the Jews or Christians22 as friends. They are but one
another's friends. If any one of you taketh them for his friends, he surely
is one of them! God will not guide the evil doers.

So shalt thou see the diseased at heart speed away to them, and say, "We fear
lest a change of fortune befall us." But haply God will of himself bring
about some victory or event of His own ordering: then soon will they repent
them of their secret imaginings.

Then will the faithful say, "What! are these they who swore, by their most
solemn oath, that they were surely with you?" Vain their works; and
themselves shall come to ruin.

O ye who believe! should any of you desert His religion, God will then raise
up a people loved by Him, and loving Him, lowly towards the faithful, haughty
towards the Infidels. For the cause of God will they contend, and not fear
the blame of the blamer. This is the Grace of God! On whom He will He
bestoweth it! God is Vast, Omniscient!

Verily, your protector is God and His Apostle, and those who believe, who
observe prayer, and pay the alms of obligation, and who bow in worship.

And whoso take God and His Apostle, and those who believe for friends, they
truly are the people of God; they shall have the upper hand.

O ye who believe! take not such of those who have received the Scriptures
before you, as scoff and jest at your religion, or the Infidels, for your
friends, but fear God if ye are believers:

Nor those who when ye call to prayer, make it an object of raillery and
derision. This they do because they are a people who understand not.

SAY:23 O people of the Book! do ye not disavow us only because we believe in
God, and in what He hath sent down to us, and in what He hath sent down
aforetime, and because most of you are doers of ill?

SAY: Can I announce to you any retribution worse than that which awaiteth
them with God? They whom God hath cursed and with whom He hath been angry-
some of them hath He changed into apes and swine; and they who worship
Thagout are in evil plight, and have gone far astray from the right path!

When they presented themselves to you they said, "We believe;" but Infidels
they came in unto you, and Infidels they went forth! God well knew what they
concealed.

Many of them shalt thou see hastening together to wickedness and malice, and
to eat unlawful things. Shame on them for what they have done!

Had not their doctors and teachers forbidden their uttering wickedness, and
their eating unlawful food, bad indeed would have been their doings!

"The hand of God," say the Jews, "is chained up."24 Their own hands shall be
chained up-and for that which they have said shall they be cursed. Nay!
outstretched are both His hands! At His own pleasure does He bestow gifts.
That which hath been sent down to thee from thy Lord will surely increase the
rebellion and unbelief of many of them; and we have put enmity and hatred
between them that shall last till the day of the Resurrection. Oft as they
kindle a beacon fire for war shall God quench it! and their aim will be to
abet disorder on the earth: but God loveth not the abettors of disorder.

But if the people of the Book believe and have the fear of God, we will
surely put away their sins from them, and will bring them into gardens of
delight: and if that they observe the law and the Evangel, and what hath been
sent down to them from their Lord, they shall surely have their fill of good
things from above them and from beneath their feet. Some there are among them
who act aright; but many of them-how evil are their doings!

O Apostle! proclaim all that hath been sent down to thee from thy Lord: for
if thou do it not, thou hast not proclaimed His message at all. And God will
protect thee from evil men: verily, God guideth not the unbelievers.

SAY: O people of the Book! ye have no ground to stand on, until ye observe
the Law and the Evangel, and that which hath been sent down to you from your
Lord.25 The Book which hath been sent down to thee from thy Lord will
certainly increase the rebellion and unbelief of many of them; but, be not
thou troubled for the unbelievers.

Verily, they who believe, and the Jews, and the Sabeites,26 and the
Christians-whoever of them believeth in God and in the last day, and doth
what is right, on them shall come no fear, neither shall they be put to
grief.

Of old we accepted the covenant of the children of Israel, and sent Apostles
to them. Oft as an Apostle came to them with that for which they had no
desire, some they treated as liars, and some they slew;27

And they reckoned that no harm would come of it:-but they became blind and
deaf! Then was God turned unto them: then many of them again became blind and
deaf! but God beheld what they did.

Infidels now are they who say, "God is the Messiah, Son of Mary;" for the
Messiah said, "O children of Israel! worship God, my Lord and your Lord."
Whoever shall join other gods with God, God shall forbid him the Garden, and
his abode shall be the Fire; and the wicked shall have no helpers.

They surely are Infidels who say, "God is the third of three:" for there is
no God but one God: and if they refrain not from what they say, a grievous
chastisement shall light on such of them as are Infidels.

Will they not, therefore, be turned unto God, and ask pardon of Him? since
God is Forgiving, Merciful!

The Messiah, Son of Mary, is but an Apostle; other Apostles have flourished
before him; and his mother was a just28 person: they both ate food.29 Behold!
how we make clear to them the signs! then behold how they turn aside!

SAY: Will ye worship, beside God, that which can neither hurt nor help? But
God! He only Heareth, Knoweth.

SAY: O people of the Book! outstep not bounds of truth in your religion;
neither follow the desires of those who have already gone astray, and who
have caused many to go astray, and have themselves gone astray from the
evenness of the way.

Those among the children of Israel who believed not were cursed by the tongue
of David,30 and of Jesus, Son of Mary. This, because they were rebellious,
and became transgressors: they forbade not one another the iniquity which
they wrought! detestable are their actions!

Thou shalt see many of them make friends of the infidels. Evil the actions
which their own passions have sent on beforehand; for God is angry with them,
and in torment shall they abide for ever:

But, if they had believed in God, and the Prophet, and the Koran which hath
been sent down to him, they had not taken them for their friends; but
perverse are most of them.

Of all men thou wilt certainly find the Jews, and those who join other gods
with God, to be the most intense in hatred of those who believe; and thou
shalt certainly find those to be nearest in affection to them who say, "We
are Christians." This, because some of them are priests and monks,31 and
because they are free from pride.

And when they hear that which hath been sent down to the Apostle, thou seest
their eyes overflow with tears at the truth they recognise therein, saying,
"O our Lord! we believe; write us down therefore with those who bear witness
to it.

And why should we not believe in God, and in the truth which hath come down
to us, and crave that our Lord would bring us into Paradise with the Just?"

Therefore hath God rewarded them for these their words, with gardens 'neath
which the rivers flow; they shall abide therein for ever: this the reward of
the righteous! But they who believe not and treat our signs as lies shall be
the inmates of Hell-fire.

O ye who believe! interdict not the healthful viands which God hath allowed
you; go not beyond this limit. God loveth not those who outstep it.32

And eat of what God hath given you for food, that which is lawful and
wholesome: and fear God, in whom ye believe.

God will not punish you for a mistaken word in your oaths: but he will punish
you in regard to an oath taken seriously.33 Its expiation shall be to feed
ten poor persons with such middling food as ye feed your own families with,
or to clothe them; or to set free a captive. But he who cannot find means,
shall fast three days. This is the expiation of your oaths when ye shall have
sworn. Keep then your oaths. Thus God maketh his signs clear to you, that ye
may give thanks.

O believers! surely wine and games of chance,34 and statues, and the divining
arrows, are an abomination of Satan's work! Avoid them, that ye may prosper.

Only would Satan sow hatred and strife among you, by wine and games of
chance, and turn you aside from the remembrance of God, and from prayer: will
ye not, therefore, abstain from them? Obey God and obey the Apostle, and be
on your guard: but if ye turn back, know that our Apostle is only bound to
deliver a plain announcement.

No blame shall attach to those who believe and do good works, in regard to
any food they have taken, in case they fear God and believe, and do the
things that are right, and shall still fear God and believe, and shall still
fear him, and do good; for God loveth those who do good.

O ye who believe! God will surely make trial of you with such game as ye may
take with your hands, or your lances, that God may know who feareth him in
secret: and whoever after this transgresseth, shall suffer a grievous
chastisement.

O believers!35 kill no game while ye are on pilgrimage. Whosoever among you
shall purposely kill it, shall comsent pensate for it in domestic animals of
equal value (according to the judgment of two just persons among you), to be
brought as an offering to the Caaba; or in expiation thereof shall feed the
poor; or as the equivalent of this shall fast, that he may taste the ill
consequence of his deed. God forgiveth what is past; but whoever doth it
again, God will take vengeance on him; for God is mighty and vengeance is
His.

It is lawful for you to fish in the sea, and to eat fish, as provision for
you and for those who travel; but it is unlawful for you to hunt by land
while ye are still on pilgrimage: fear ye God, therefore, before whom ye
shall be assembled.

God hath appointed the Caaba,36 the sacred house, to be a station for
mankind, and the sacred month, and the offering, and its ornaments. This,
that ye may know that God knoweth all that is in the heavens and on the
earth, and that God hath knowledge of everything. Know that God is severe in
punishing, and that God is Forgiving, Merciful.

The Apostle is only bound to preach: and God knoweth what ye bring to light,
and what ye conceal.

SAY: The evil and the good shall not be valued alike, even though the
abundance of evil please thee; therefore fear God, O ye of understanding!
that it may be well with you.

O believers! ask us not of things which if they were told might only pain
you; but if ye ask of such things when the entire Koran shall have been sent
down, they will be declared to you: God will pardon you for this, for God is
Forgiving, Gracious. They who were before you, asked concerning such things,
and afterwards quickly disbelieved therein

God hath not ordained anything on the subject. of Bahira, or Saƒèba, or
Wasila, or Hami;37 but the unbelievers have invented this lie against God:
and most of them had no understanding.

And when it was said to them, "Accede to that which God hath sent down, and
to the Apostle:" they said, "Sufficient for us is the faith in which we found
our fathers." What! though their fathers knew nothing, and had no guidance?

O believers! take heed to yourselves.38 He who erreth shall not hurt you when
ye have the "guidance:" to God shall ye all return, and He will tell you that
which ye have done.

O believers! let there be witnesses between you, when death draweth nigh to
any of you, at the time of making the testament; two witnesses-just men from
among yourselves, or two others of a different tribe from yourselves-if ye be
journeying in the earth, and the calamity of death surprise you. Ye shall
shut them both up, after the prayer; and if ye doubt them, they shall swear
by God, "We will not take a bribe though the party be of kin to us, neither
will we conceal the testimony of God, for then we should be among the
wicked."

But if it shall be made clear that both have been guilty of a falsehood, two
others of those who have convicted them thereof, the two nearest in blood
shall stand up in their place, and they shall swear by God, "Verily our
witness is more true than the witness of these two; neither have we advanced
anything untrue, for then should we be of the unjust."

Thus will it be easier for men to bear a true39 witness, or fear lest after
their oath another oath be given. Therefore fear God and hearken; for God
guideth not the perverse.

One day will God assemble the Apostles, and say, "What reply was made to
you?" They shall say, "We have no knowledge, but Thou art the Knower of
Secrets."

When He shall say: O Jesus! Son of Mary! call to mind my favour upon thee and
upon thy mother, when I strengthened thee with the Holy Spirit, that thou
shouldest speak40 to men alike in the cradle, and when grown up;-

And when I taught thee the Scripture, and Wisdom, and the Law, and the
Evangel: and thou didst create of clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, by
my leave, and didst breathe into it, and by my leave it became a bird; and
thou didst heal the blind and the leper, by my leave; and when, by my leave,
thou didst bring forth the dead; and when I withheld the children of Israel
from thee, when thou hadst come to them with clear tokens: and such of them
as believed not said, "This is nought but plain sorcery;"41

And when I revealed unto the Apostles, "Believe on me and on my Sent One,"
they said, "We believe; and bear thou witness that we are Muslims."

Remember when the Apostles42 said-"O Jesus, Son of Mary! is thy Lord able to
send down a furnished TABLE to us out of Heaven?" He said-"Fear God if ye be
believers."

They said-"We desire to eat therefrom, and to have our hearts assured; and to
know that thou hast indeed spoken truth to us, and to be witnesses thereof."

Jesus, Son of Mary, said-"O God, our Lord! send down a table to us out of
Heaven, that it may become a recurring festival to us, to the first of us and
to the last of us, and a sign from thee; and do thou nourish us, for thou art
the best of nourishers."

And God said-Verily, I will cause it to descend unto you; but whoever among
you after that shall disbelieve, I will surely chastise him with a
chastisement, wherewith I will not chastise any other creature.43

And when God shall say-"O Jesus, Son of Mary: hast thou said unto mankind-
'Take me and my mother as two Gods, beside God?"' He shall say-"Glory be unto
Thee! it is not for me to say that which I know to be not the truth; had I
said that, verily thou wouldest have known it: Thou knowest what is in me,
but I know not what is in Thee; for Thou well knowest things unseen!

"I spake not to them aught but that which thou didst bid me-'Worship God, my
Lord and your Lord;' and I was a witness of their actions while I stayed
among them; but since thou hast taken me to Thyself, Thou hast Thyself
watched them, and Thou art witness of all things:

"If Thou punish them, they are Thy servants, and if Thou forgive them. . .
.44 Thou, verily, art the Mighty, the Wise!"

God will say-This day shall their truth advantage the truthful. Gardens shall
they have 'neath which the rivers flow, and remain therein for ever: God is
well pleased with them and they with Him. This shall be the great bliss.

Unto God belongeth the sovereignty of the Heavens and of the Earth, and of
all that they contain; and He hath power over all things.


_______________________

1 The garlands, etc., attached to the victims offered at Mecca.

2 When you have again returned to your common and everyday life by laying
aside the ihram, or pilgrim's robe. This generally consists of two pieces of
cotton, or linen, or woollen cloth, without seam or ornament, one of which is
wrapped round the loins, and the other thrown over the shoulders. The instep,
heel, and head must be bare.

3 The Koreisch sent to meet Muhammad, who was on his way to visit the Caaba
with 1400 men, at Hudaibiya (An. Hej. 6) to prohibit his nearer approach. A
truce for ten years was ultimately concluded.

4 By making war in the holy month.

5 Comp. Tract Cholin, c. 3.

6 Lit. on blocks or shafts of stone. These were set up by the pagan Arabs in
front of their houses for the purpose of sacrificing thereon. See Freytag's
Einl. p. 462, and Tr. Cholin, p. 39, 40, 41.

7 It was the custom to draw lots for joints of a camel with arrows, some
feathered and others unfeathered, kept for this purpose in the temple of
Mecca. See Pocock, Spec. Hist. Ar., under the word Hobal.

8 In the sense of sound, healthful.

9 Thus Talm. Tr. Berachoth, 46.

10 This refers to the oath of fidelity which Muhammad's followers took at Al
Akaba. Abulf. Vit.Moh.p.43.

11 It is quite uncertain to what events this refers. The commentators
narrate, and have doubtless invented, various incidents as having occasioned
it.

12 Verses 15-38 belong probably to the period shortly before the taking of
Chaibar in the beginning of Hej. 7. It is remarkable that Muhammad, although
he has invented these twelve leaders of tribes, should nowhere mention the
number of the Apostles. There is no doubt, however, from the ancient
biographies, that he chose twelve assistants for the propagation of Islam.
See Gagnier, Vie de M. ii. xvi.

13 The space between the mission of different prophets.

14 Called by the Arabians Habeel and Kabeel. The dialogue between Cain and
Abel is slightly varied from that given in Targ. Jerus. on Gen. iv. 8, and
Jonath. Ben Uzziel.

15 Or, the sin against me, i.e. of slaying me.

16 In the Jewish tradition the raven shews the mode of burial to Adam, not to
Cain. Pirke R. Elieser, c. 21. Midr. fol. II ap. Weil (Legenden, p. 39).

17 Or, corpse.

18 Thus Mischn. Sanhedr. iv. 5, "We find it said in the case of Cain who
murdered his brother-'The voice of thy brother's bloods crieth'-It is not
said, blood of thy brother, but bloods, i.e. his blood and the blood of his
seed. Therefore was man created single, in order to shew that to him who
kills a single individual of Israel it shall be reckoned as if he had slain
the whole race, and that he, etc." precisely as in the text. Comp. also the
same form of expression in Bab. Tal, Kidush, ¬ß 1, "If one fulfil but one
commandment, he causes the scale of innocence to preponderate for himself and
the whole world; but if he commit one sin, he causes the scale of guilt to
preponderate for himself and the whole world.

19 Muhammad is said by the early traditionists to have punished a woman who
had been guilty of theft in this manner while on the route to Mecca previous
to its capture. We are, therefore, able to fix the date of verses 39-44.

20 Usury, bribes.

21 Ex. xxi. 23-27.

22 This may refer to proposals made to the Muslims to enter into alliance
with the Jews and Christians against the heathen, after the reverse at Ohod.
Lane observes (Mod. Egyptians, i. 358) with regard to this precept, that "of
the leading features of the character of the Mooslims none is more remarkable
than their religious pride. They regard persons of every other faith as the
children of perdition; and such the Mooslim is early taught to despise." They
are, however, "as remarkable for their toleration as for their contempt of
unbelievers."

23 Weil suggests that verses 64-88 were revealed subsequently to contests
with the Jews, but before Muhammad had broken with the Christians, i.e.
between Hej. 4 and 8.

24 That is, God has ceased to be bounteous. The Muslims believe that at the
day of judgment all the Jews will appear with the right hand tied to the
neck.

25 That is, the Koran. The Jew was to retain a faith in the Towr√¢t, or Law;
the Christian in the Injil, or Gospel; but both Jews and Christians were to
receive the Koran as the complement of both.

26 See Sura [xci.] ii. 59, p. 344.

27 I Thess. ii. 15.

28 Did not give herself out to be a goddess. Djelal.

29 That is, were human beings, and subject to the usual wants and liabilities
of ordinary persons.

30 See Sura ii. 61, p. 344. Mark viii. 30.

31 Geiger derives both the Arabic words from Syriac terms, and renders elders
and clerics, p. 51. But the root of the Arabic word rendered monk is
generally said to be rahaba, to fear.

32 Comp. Sura [cix.] 1xvi. 2. The date of verses 89-91 is therefore probably
Hej. 7.

33 If you violate it.

34 See verse 4. Tradition has expanded the word ansab, so as to include all
figures, and hence the strict observers of the letter of the Koran forbid the
game of chess. The Persians, however, and Indians generally interpret this
verse more liberally.

35 This and the two following verses are placed by the commentators in the
year of Hudaibiya, as also 98, 99, 100.

36 That is, Cube-House. Maison Carr√©e. It is also commonly called the Bait
Ullah, House of God. The Caaba is an oblong massive structure 55 ft. in
length, 45 in breadth, and the height somewhat greater than the length. At
the S.E. corner is the famous Hajar El-Aswad, or Black Stone, according to
Lieut. Burton, an undoubted aerolite. It is figured in Mr. Muir's "Life of
Mahomet." The Caaba stands in an open parallelogram of about 500 ft. by 530
ft. and is surrounded by colonnades, the pillars of which, made of various
marbles, some Egyptian but mostly Meccan, stand in a quadruple row on the
east side, and three deep on the other sides, and amount to 554. It has been
rebuilt several times, but has not been materially altered since A.H. 1040.

37 Names given to the sacred animals which were marked and allowed to range
for pasture at liberty. The dedicated mother-camel was the Saiba; the Wasila
included also goats or ewes; the eleventh female offspring of the camel was
Bahira; the dedicated stallion was Hami. These forms of superstition grew up,
obviously, from a remote period, out of the intense affection of the Bedouin
for his flocks, especially his horses and camels.

38 Lit. on you your souls.

39 Lit. upon its face, i.e. according to its plain scope.

40 See Evang. Infant. c. 1, Invenimus in libro Josephi Pontificis qui vixit
tempore Christi, Jesum locutum esse, et quidem cum in cunis jaceret, etc. The
date of verse 108 to the end is uncertain.

41 Precisely the same expression is applied to our Lord in the Arabic Evang.
Infantiƒá, c. 36 at the end, which also relates the story of the Birds.

42 Ar. El-hawariyin, a different word from that used for Jesus, Hud, Saleh,
and the other apostles par excellence. The root of the word is the ƒÜthiopic
hawyra, to go, send; hence the Church is called in ƒÜthiopic the Beth
chrestyan ant hawariyat, i.e. Apostolic. See, however, the note on Thilo's
Cod. Apoc. p. 152, who derives from the root hur, to be white, pure; hence,
friends, helpers.

43 Comp. 1 Cor. xi. 27, sqq.-Muhammad obviously refers to the Eucharist.

44 Thou hast a right to do so as their Lord.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Koran as translated by Rodwell End
of The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Q'uran as translated by Rodwell



INDEX


[The Roman figures shew the Sura, the second figures the verse, and the
third, in parenthesis, the page.]


AARON, relics of, ii. 249 (365)
	Receives a revelation, iv. 161 (428);
	vi. 84 (324); xxi. 49 (154)
	Makes the calf, xx. 92 (99)
	Clear of speech, xxviii. 34 (250)
	Brother of Mary, xix. 29 (119)
Ababils, cv. 3 (36)
Abel and Cain, v. 30 (489)
Ablutions, iv. 46 (416); v. 9 (486)
Abraham, receives a revelation, ii. 130 (352); lxxxvii. 19 (40)
	Neither Jew nor Christian, ii. 134 (352)
	Is a Hanyf, or sound in faith, iii. 89 (395); vi. 162 (333); xvi. 121
(209)
	Is visited by Angels, xi. 72 (221); xv. 51 (114)
	Preaches the Divine unity, xxix. 15 (262); xliii. 25 (136); vi. 74
(323)
	Is made Im√¢m, ii. 118 (350)
	Argues with Nimrod, ii. 260 (367)
	Is taught the resurrection, ii. 262 (367)
	Is a Muslim, iii. 60 (392)
	Is ready to sacrifice his son, xxxvii. 101 (82)
	Builds the Caaba, xxii. 27 (455); iii. 91, note (395)
	Prays for his race, xiv. 38 (229)
	Is condemned to the flames, xxi. 68 (155)
Abrogation, ii. 100 (349); xvi. 103 (207)
Abu Jahl, xcvi. 16 (20)
Abu Lahab, cxi. (29)
Ad or Adites, vii. 63, note (300)
Adam, his sin, vii. 18 (295); ii. 34 (341)
	Worshipped by angels, ii. 32 (341); xx. 115 (101); xviii. 48 (185);
xvii. 63 (169)
	Is as Jesus, iii. 52 (391)
Adopted Children, xxxiii. 4, 5, 37 (434)
Adultery, iv. 19, 30 (412); xvii. 34 (167); xxiv. 6 (444); xxxiii. 30 (437)
Ahmed, lxi. 6 (405)
Al Araf (Purgatory), vii. 44 (298)
Alexander the Great, or Dhoul-karnain, xviii. 82 (188)
Alms, ii. 211 (361); lviii. 13, 14 (452); lxiv. 16, 17 (373); xxx. 38 (213)
Amulets, note (27)
Angels, bear God¬ís throne, lxix. 17 (59)
	Intercede, xl. 7 (240); xlii. 3 (270)
	Die, xxxix. 68 (260)
	Aid believers, xiii. 12 (334); iii. 120 (397); vi. 61 (322); viii. 9,
12 (376)
	Daughters of God, xvi. 59 (204); xvii. 42 (168); xxxvii. 150 (84);
xliii. 18 (136); liii.
	    28 (70)
	Guard Hell, lxxiv. 30 (22)
	Of Death, vi. 61 (322); vii. 35 (296); xvi. 30 (201); xxxii. 11 (190);
xlvii. 29 (384)
	Of Babel, ii. 96 (348)
Ant, xxvii. 17 (175)
Arafat, ii. 194 (359)
Ayesha, xxiv. 10 (444), note
Azar, vi. 74 (323); lx. 4 (466)

Babel, Angels of, ii. 96 (348)
Balance, xxi. 48 (154); vii. 7 (294); lvii. 25 (409)
Baptism, ii. 132 (352)
Beast, the, xxvii. 84 (179)
Becca.  See Mecca.
Bedr, iii. 11 (386); viii. 5 (375), 42 (378)
Bird, i.e., Destiny, vii. 128 (305); xvii. 14 (166); xxvii. 48 (177); xxxvi.
18 (131)
	(Ababils), cv. 3 (36)
Booty, viii. 1, 42 (375); xlviii. 19, 20 (462)

Caaba, ii. 119-21 (351)


Cain, v. 30 (489)
Calf (Golden), ii. 48 (342), 88 (347), iv. 152 (427); vii. 146 (306); xx. 90
(99)
Christians, less opposed to Muslims than Jews, etc., v. 85 (495)
Circumcision, not mentioned in the Koran
Corah, xxviii. 76 (252); xxix. 38 (264); xl. 25 (242)
Creation of the world, xvi. 3 (200); l. 37 (93); xiii. 3, 4 (334); xxxv.
(289)
	Of Heavens and Earth, xli. 8-11 (193)
	To set forth his truth, xvi. 4 (200)
	For man, xvi. 14 (201), 82 (206)

David, makes coats of mail, xxi. 80 (156); xxxiv. 10 (285)
	His judgment, xxxviii. 20 (125)
	His praises of God, xxxiv. 10 (285); xxxviii. 16, 17 (125)
Deluge, liv. 9 (77); lxix. 11 (59)
Dhoul Karnain, xviii. 82 (188)
Dhoul Kefl, xxi. 85 (156); xxxviii. 48 (127)
Dhoul Noon, xxi. 87 (157)
Disciples of Christ, lvii. 27 (409)
Divorce, iv. 24 (413); xxxiii. 48 (439); lviii. 4 (451); lxv. 1, 2, 6 (429);
ii. 226 sqq. (362)
Djalout (Goliath), ii. 250 (366)
Djibt, iv. 54 (417)
Djinn, vi. 100 (326), 128 (329); xli. 24, 29 (194)
	Created of fire, xv. 27 (113); lv. 14 (74)
	Good and bad, xi. 120 (225); lxxii. 11 (141)
	In the power of Solomon, xxvii. 39 (176); xxxviii. 36 (127)
	Hear the Koran, xlvi. 28 (316); lxxii. (141)
	Hear what passes in Heaven, xxvi. 212 (110); xv. 17 (113); xxxvii. 7
(79); xviii. 48
	   (185), etc.

Eblis (note, 341)
Eden, ix. 73 (478); xiii. 23 (335); xviii. 30 (183); xxxv. 30 (292); lxi. 12
(406)
Edris or Enoch, xix. 57 (121); xxi. 85 (156)
Egypt.  See under Pharaoh, Moses, Magicians
Elephant, cv. (36)
Elias (an Apostle), vi. 85 (325); xxxvii. 123 (83)
Elisha, vi. 86 (325); xxxviii. 48 (127)
Enemies, treatment of, lx. 9 (466)
Evangel, lvii. 27, note (409)
Ezdras, ix. 30 (473)

Faith and Good Works, xvi. 99 (207); viii. 1 (375)
Fast, the, ii. 179-183 (357)
Fatalism, iii. 139 (399); lxxxvii. 3 (40); viii. 17 (376); ix. 51 (476);
xiii. 30 (336); xiv. 4
   (226); xviii. 81 (187), 102 (189)
Fire, obtained by friction, xxxvi. 80 (134); lvi. 70 (68)

Gabriel, xvi. 104 (207); lxvi. 4 (464); lxxxi. 19 (46)
	Enemy of the Jews, ii. 81 (346)
	Bearer of Revelation, liii. 5, 6 (69)
Gehennam, the form of the word (189), note
	Has seven gates, xv. 44 (114)
	Its guardians, xl. 52 (244); lxxiv. 30 (22)
Genii.  See Djinn
God (Allah), one cxii. (29); xxxvii 4 (79); xx. 7 (94)
	His names, vii. 179 (310)
	Creator, vi. 101 (326)
	Unwearied by creation, l. 37 (93)
	His power, ii. (throughout); iii. 159 (401)
	Is a light, xxiv. 35 (446)
	Perfect in His works, lxvii. 3 (142)
	Provides for all, xv. 20 (114); xvii. 21, 32 (166)
	His words are countless, xviii. 109 (189); xxxi. 26 (269)
	The avenger, iii. 3 (386); v. 96 (496); x. 100 (283); xiv. 48 (230)
	Has no offspring, ii. 110 (350); vi. 100 (326); xix. 36 (120); 91-93
(123); xxi. 26
	   (152); xxxvii. 149 (84); xxxix. 6 (255); lxxii. 3 (141)
	Because He has no wife, vi. 101 (326); cxii. 3 (29)
	Changes not, xlviii. 23 (462)
	Created all beings to adore Him, li. 56 (63)
	How He speaks with man, xlii. 50 (274)
	Leads and misleads, xxxv. 9 (290); xiii. 27 (336); lxi. 5 (405)
	His decrees, xiv. 4, 32 (226-28)


God, made reprobates for Hell, vii. 178 (310)
	Is author of good and evil deeds, xci. 8 (38)
	And yet good is from Him, evil from man, iv. 81 (419)
	Omniscient, vi. 59 (322); lviii. 8 (451)
	Omnipotent (passim)
	All seeing but unseen, vi. 103 (327); lvii. 6 (407)
	All hearinng, xliv. 5 (89)
	Gracious, iii. 28 (388)
	Omnipresent, lvii. 3 (407)
	His Providence (passim)
	Eternal, cxii. 2 (29)
	The first and last, lvii. 3 (407)
	Forgiving (passim)
	Grateful, iv. 146 (426)
	Subtile, vi. 103 (327)
	Self-sufficient, xxvii. 40 (176); xxxv. 27 (292)
Gog, Magog, xviii. 93 (188); xxi. 96 (157)
Goliath.  See Djalout.
Greeks, xxx. 1 (210)
Greetings, iv. 88 (420)

Habil (Abel), v. 30 (489)
Haman, vizier of Pharaoh, xxviii. 5 (247); xxix. 38 (264); xl. 25, 38 (242,
43)
Harut and Marut, ii. 96 (348)
Heavens, seven, lxvii. 3 (142); lxxviii. 12 (52)
Hedjr, xv. 80 (115)
Hell, made for Djinn and men, vii. 36 (296); xi. 120 (225)
	Duration of, xi. 109 (224); vi. 128 (329)
Honein, ix. 25 (473)
Hotama or Crushing Fire, civ. 4, 5 (30)
Houd, vii. 63 (300); xi. 52 (220); xxvi. 123 (107)
Houris, lvi. 34 (67)
Hypocrites, ii. 9-19 (339)
	Their conduct at Medina, xxxiii. 9-15 (435)
	Their treatment, xxxiii. 47 (439)
	Their portion hereafter, lvii. 13 (408)

Idolaters, those who associate other gods with God, ii. 107 (350); xxv. 3
(159); xxviii. 62-
   74 (252); lii. 34-49 (64)
	Are unclean, ix. 28 (473)
Idolators, not to be prayed for, ix. 114, 5 (483)
	The unpardonable sin, iv. 51 (417), 116 (424)
Immunity, ix. 1 (468)
Imran, iii. 30 (388); lxvi. 12 (465)
Infidels deny the future life, vi. 29 (319); xix. 67 (122)
	Their portion, iii. 8 (386), 112 (397)
	Their hardness of heart, vi. 109  (327)
	Hold mere opinions, liii. 29 (70)
	Those who die infidels, iii. 85 (394)
Initial Letters, 32 (note)
Irem, lxxxix. 6 (54)
Isaak (Ishak), ii. 127 ff. (351); vi. 84 (324); xi. 74 (221); xix. 50 (121);
xxi. 72 (155); xxxvii.
   112 (83)
Islam, ii. 132 (352); iii. 79 (394); xlix. 14 (470)
Ismael, ii. 119 ff. (351); vi. 86 (324); xix. 55 (121); xxxviii. 48 (127)
Israelites, a pre-eminent race, ii. 116 (350)
	Pass the Red sea, xxvi. 63 (105)
	In Egypt, xxviii. 2, 3 (247)
	See Jews.

Jacob, ii. 126 (351); iii. 87 (395); xi. 74 (221); xix. 50 (121); xxxviii. 45
(127)
Jesus, ii. 81 (346), 254 (366); v. 50 (491); vi. 85 (325); xxiii. 52 (147);
lvii. 27 (409); lxi. 6,
   14 (405)
	His history, iii. 40-52 (390)
	His divinity denied, iii. 73 (393)
	Was not put to death, iv. 156 (427)
	God could destroy him if He chose, v. 19 (488)
	Is only a servant of God, v. 109 ff. (498); xliii. 57 (138), 63 (139)
	His birth, xix. 23, 24 (119)
	His profession, xix. 31 (119)
Jews (of Muhammad¬ís time), ii. 59 (344), 88 (347); iii. 62 (392); ix. 30
(473); lviii. 15 (452)
	The punishment in store for them, iv. 50 (416); v. 69 (493)
	Their conduct, iii. 184 (403)
	Their captious words, iii. 179 (403)
	Their perversions of Scripture, ii. 98 (348); iv. 48 (416)


Jews, enemies to Muslims, v. 85 (495)
	Their lex talionis, v. 48, 49, 69 (491, 493)
	Their calumnies against the Virgin Mary, iv. 155 (427)
Job, vi. 84 (324); xxi. 83 (156); xxxviii. 40 (127)
John, xix. 7 (117); xxi. 90 (157)
Jonah, vi. 86 (324); x. 98 (283); xxxvii. 139 (84); lxviii. 48 (34)
Joseph, vi. 84 (324); xii. (230); xl. 36 (242)
Joshua, xviii. 59 (186)

Kadr or Power (night of), xliv. 2, 3 (89); xcvii. 1-5 (36)
Karoun (Corah), xxviii. 76 (252); xxix. 38 (264); xl. 25 (242)
Kebla, ii. 109 (350), 136-145 (353)
Khidr, xviii. 62, note (186)
Koran, a divine work, iv. 84 (420); xlvi. 2-7 (313); liii. 4 (69)
	Preserved in Heaven, xiii. 39 (337), lxxxv. 21 (43)
	Is not the work of djinn, xxvi. 210 (110)
	Is admired by djinn, xlvi. 28 (316)
	Confirms the Scriptures, x. 38 (278)
Koreisch, cvi. 1 (36)

Lokman, xxxi. (267)
Lot (a prophet), vi. 86 (325); vii. 78 (301)
Lotus (of the boundary), liii. 14, note (69)

Madian, vii. 83 (301); xxviii. 24 (249)
Magi, xxii. 17 (589)
Magicians, x. 80 (282); xx. 60 (97); xxvi. 37 (104)
Malec, xliii. 77 (454)
Man, his creation, ii. 28 (340) etc.
	Hasty, xxi. 38 (153); xvii. 12 (165); lxx. 19 (73)
	Created weak, iv. 32 (414)
	Of clay, xv. 26 (113)
	Of clots of blood, xcvi. 2 (19); xxii. 5 (453)
	Inconstant, xxii. 11 (454)
	Ungrateful, xvii. 69 (170)
	Was one people, ii. 209 (360)
Manna, vii. 160 (308); xx. 82 (98)
Marriage, xxxiii. 50 (439)
	Lawful and unlawful, ii. 220 (361); v. 7 (486); iv. 26-30 (413)
Mary, Mother of Jesus, iii. 31 (389); iv. 169 (428); v. 79 (494); xix. 16
(118); xxi. 91
   (157); lxvi. 12 (465)
	Calumniated by Jews, iv. 155 (427)
Meats forbidden, ii. 168 (356); v. 1-4 (485); vi. 118 (328)
Mecca or Becca, iii. 90 (395); xlvii. 14 (383); xlviii. 24 (462)
Merwa, ii. 153 (354)
Michael, ii. 92 (348)
Mina, ii. 199 (359)
Mohadjers, ix. 101 (481); lix. 8 (432)
Monastic Life, lvii. 27 (409)
Monks, ix. 31 (474)
Month (sacred), ii. (361); ix. 5 (471)
Moon, its worship forbidden, xli. 37 (195)
Moses, ii. 48 ff. (342)
	Brings water from rock, vii. 160 (308)
	Reared in Egypt, xx. 36 (95); xxviii. 2-30 (247)
	His meeting with Khidr, xviii. 62 (186)
	His wrath at Aaron, xx. 95 (99)
	Prophet and apostle, xix. 52 (121)
Muhammad, illiterate, vii. 156 (307)
	Foretold in the Scriptures, vii. 156 (307); lxi. 6 (406)
	Seal of the Prophets, xxxiii. 40 (438)
	Sees Gabriel, liii. 9 (69); lxxxi. 22 (46)
	Becomes apostle at man¬ís estate, x. 17 (276)
	Subject to hallucinations, note 1 (21)
	His Night-journey, xvii. 1 (164).  See Pref.
	Belief in Satanic influence, xvi. 101-2 (207)
Muslims, their description, iii. 106 (396); xlviii. 29 (463)

Nicknames forbidden, xlix. 12 (469)
Noah, iii. 30 (388)
	Is a prophet, iv. 161 (428); vi. 84 (324)
	And apostle, vii. 57 (299)
	Builds the ark, xi. 40 (218)
	Preaches, lxxi. 1-29 (85)

Offerings, v. 2 (485)
Ondhorna, ii. 98 (348)
Ozair or Esdras, ix. 30 (473)

Parables of the two Gardens, xviii. 32 ff. (184)


Parables of the Light, xxiv. 35 (446)
	For the Resurrection, xli. 39 (195)
	For Infidels, ii. 16, 18, etc. (339)
	Of truth and error, xiii. 18 (335)
Paraclete, lxi. 6, note (406)
Paradise, lvi. 12 (66); lv. 46 (75)
	Terresrial, ii. 33 (341)
	The abode of the blessed, ii. 23 (340); xxxvi. 54 ff. (133); xxxvii. 38
(80)
Parents, duties towards, xvii. 24, 25 (166); xxix. 7 (262); xxxi. 13 (268);
xlvi. 14 (314)
Pharaoh, ii. 46 (342); x. 76 (281); xliii. 45 (138); xl. 38 (242)
	A believer in his family, xl. 29 (242)
	The impaler, xxxviii. 12 (125)
Piety, or fear of God, ii. 172 (356)
Pilgrimmage, xxii. 25 (455); ii. 153 (354); iii. 91 (395); v. 2 (485)
Prayer, Kebla, ii. 136-140 (353), 239 (364); iv. 46 (416); v. 8 (486); vii.
204 (313); xiii. 15
   (335); xi. 116 (225); xvii. 80 (171); xxix. 44 (265); l. 39 (93)
	In war, iv. 102, 3 (422)
	The Muslims, iii. 188 (404); xxv. 66, 74 (163)
	Joseph¬ís, xii. 102 (239)
	Abraham¬ís, xiv. 38 (229); ii. 120 (351)
Prayers, ii. 286 (370)
Predestination, iii. 148 (400); vi. 35 (320); xvi. 38, 39 (202); xxxii. 13
(191); xxxiii. 38
   (438); xxxiv. 19 (286); xxxv. 9 (290); xxxvi. 6 ff. (130); liii. 33 ff.
(71); lvii. 22 (409)
Prophets, xix. 42, note (120); xxi. 25 (152)
	Of different degrees, ii. 254 (366); xvii. 57 (169)
	Not to be worshipped, iii. 74 (393)
	False, vi. 93 (325)
Psalter, xvii. 57 (169); xxi. 105 (158)
Purgatory, vii. 44 (298)

Rahman, xvii. 110 (173)
Raina, ii. 98 (348)
Rakim, xviii. 8 (181)
Ramadhan, ii. 181 (357)
Rass, xxv. 40 (160); l. 12 (92)
Refrain, instances of, li. 50, 51 (62); liv. 17 ff. (77); lvi. 13, 14 (66),
with, 38, 39 (67); lxxvii.
   15 ff. (50)
Religion (Monotheistic), ii. 124-134 (351-352); xlii. 11 (271)
Reprobates, iii. 80 (394); vi. 69 (323); xxi. 45 ff. (154); xxii. 20 ff.
(455); lxxvii. 7-40 (48)
Resurrection, ii. 261 (367); iii. 102 (396); vii. 55 (299); xxxiv. 7 (285);
l. 3, 11, 14 (91);
   xcix. 2 (44)

Saba, xxvii. 22 (175); xxxiv. 14 (285)
Sabeites, ii. 59 (344); v. 73 (644); xxii. 17 (454)
Safa, ii. 151 (354)
Sakar, lxxiv. 43 (23)
Saleh, vii. 71 (300, note); xi. 64 (220); xxvi. 142 (108); xxvii. 46 (177);
liv. 27 (78)
Saul, ii. 248 (365)
Scriptures, falsified by Jews and Christians, ii. 39 (342), 73 (345)
Selsebil, lxxvi. 18 (88)
Seven Sleepers, xviii. 8 (181)
Shoaib, vii. 83 (301); xi. 85 ff. (222); xxvi. 176 (109); xxix. 35 (264)
Sidjill, xxi. 104, note (158)
Sidjin, lxxxiii. 7 (57)
Sinai, shaken over Israel, ii. 87 (347), 170 (356); iv. 153 (427); xx. 82
(98); xxviii. 44, 46
   (250); lii. 1 (63)
Solomon, vi. 84 (324)
	His judgment, etc. xxi. 78 (156)
	Lord of Djinn and winds, xxi. 81 (156); xxxiv. 11, 13 (285)
	and Queen of Saba, xxvii. 17 (175)
	His horses, xxxviii. 29, 38 (126, 127)
	His death, xxxiv. 13 (285)
Spider, xxix. 40 (264)
Spirit, xvii. 87 (171)
	Conveyed unto the Virgin¬ís womb, iv. 169 (428)
	The Holy Spirit, ii. 81 (346), 254 (366); xvi. 104 (207)
Statues and Images, v. 92 (496)
Suicide forbidden, iv. 33 (414)
Sun, its worship forbidden, xli. 37 (195)

Table, Lord¬ís, v. 112 (499)
Tabouk, ix. 80, 82 (479)
Tasnim, lxxxiii. 27 (58)
Testament, ii. 176 ff. (356); v. 105 (498)
Themoud, vii. 71 (300); ix. 71 (478)
Throne (verse of), ii. 256 (366)


Trinity, iv. 169 (428); v. 77 (494)
Trumpet (last), xxiii. 103 (150); xxxvi. 51 (133); xxxvii. 19 (80)
Trumpets, lxxix. 6 (48)

Visit (Umra) of the Holy places, ix. 18 (472)

Wine, rivers of, xlvii. 16 (383)
Wives, number allowed, iv. 3 (411)

Yathril, xxxiii. 13 (435)

Zacharias, iii. 32 (389); vi. 85 (325); xix. 1 (117); xxi. 88 (157)
Zaid, xxxiii. 37 (438)
Zakkoum, xxxvii. 60 (81); xliv. 43 (90); lvi. 52 (67)
Zendjebil, lxxvi. 17 (88)


End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Koran as translated by Rodwell
End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Q'uran as translated by Rodwell

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Used People Lot, by Irving Fang

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Used People Lot

Author: Irving Fang

Release Date: October 21, 2019 [EBook #60545]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE USED PEOPLE LOT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          The Used People Lot

                            BY IRVING FANG

                  _Faint car never won fair lady!...
                   Make_ your _car proud of you!...
                 Grinning Gregory helps used people!_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Worlds of If Science Fiction, August 1958.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


It's had it. Finished. Done. My wonderful red Thunderflash, I thought
to myself, isn't worth the electricity to atomize it to Kingdom Come.

Ever since that drunk in his two-seat Charioteer plowed into the rear
end with such force that even my radar repellant couldn't stop it,
my Thunderflash had been out of kilter. The specialists my garage
recommended worked over it for two days, but couldn't get it to
running the way it did new.

And what was I supposed to do for an automobile now? I had signed the
customary 40-year pact for half my salary to pay for it. That meant I
would still be shelling out by 2117.

Weeping over it wasn't going to do any good. It was stuck on the fifth
level expressway and that was that. I levered myself out (at least
the ejector still worked) then got behind the car and gave it a good
old-fashioned push to get it on an off-ramp, out of the stream of
traffic.

After I parked I remembered I was heading for a date with Jenny. I
checked my wallet. No, not enough for a taxi there. I would just have
to phone her to cancel the date.

Reluctantly I pushed the tip of my tongue against my tooth telephone.

"Operator," said the operator.

"Poplar 3104, please."

"Thank you. One moment. I'll ache it for you."

She dialed the number of the tooth telephone in Jenny's mouth, so the
two fine wires sent gentle electric currents into the nerve. On the
third ache Jenny clicked the receiver open with the tip of her tongue.

"Hello?"

"Jenny, this is Arnold. I won't be able to come over this evening."

"But we had a date," Jenny said in a petulant voice.

"I know, but my car broke down."

"Again?"

"Yes, honey."

"Why don't you do something about it?" Jenny complained.

"But baby, what can I do? I've been to the garage. I've been to the
specialists. I'm so broke on account of these repair bills I've been
living on macaroni concentrate for the last couple of weeks."

Jenny, my beautiful sweetheart, was distinctly unhappy. "Don't come to
me with your troubles," she replied. "In fact, you don't have to come
to me at all until you can come like a gentleman."

"Aw, listen just a minute, Jenny," I started to plead. But it was too
late. Jenny had clicked off.

A fine thermokettle of fish! A month ago I had a shiny lifetime car and
was romancing the best looking girl in town. Then one drunk comes along
and my car is next to useless and my girl is mad at me.

Feeling in a distinctly blue mood I moved my tongue to the other side
of my mouth and shoved on my tooth radio. I rolled the tongue over the
bottom of the tooth until I got a program with some blues music. Just
the way I felt. The blues. I sat in the front seat of my Thunderflash
and listened to the music echoing against my tonsils.

After the song came the inevitable commercial. Only this was a new one.
The announcer said:

"Here's some big, big, big news from Grinning Gregory, your largest
volume dealer in lifetime cars. Gregory announced today that his used
people lots are nearly empty. Yes, Grinning Gregory's used people lots
are nearly empty. And that means good, good, good news for you car
owners with lifetime contracts who would like new cars.

"Grinning Gregory has added to his stocks of new Orions,
Thunderflashes, Galaxies, Solars, Charioteers, Protons and Fords. For
the first time in two years, yes, the first time in two years, he has
more new cars than new people to sell them to.

"So he is offering a limited number of them to used people, you folks
who have had cars, on his conveniently located used people lots. Come
on down and let some of Grinning Gregory's new cars look you over.
Be sure and bring photostats of your credit ratings and official car
histories. Hurry, hurry, hurry and avoid the rush to Grinning Gregory's
used people lots."

The commercial ended and was replaced by music.

Gosh, that was exciting news. Ever since the accident I had given up
hope of ever owning a decent running car again, automobile prices and
government restrictions being what they were.

I clicked on my tooth telephone and ached my garage mechanic to come
by and pick up my car. Then I took my credit rating and official car
history from the glove compartment and caught a helibus to the nearest
of Grinning Gregory's used people lots.

       *       *       *       *       *

A lot of guys were already there before me, most of them in the same
fix I was. They had been in accidents or they were divorced and their
wives got custody of the car, although they still had to pay for it.

Some of them had been on the lot for some time and looked a little
shopworn under the lights and fluttering pennants, but they hadn't
found a car yet that would take them. We were all classified as used
people, a lot less desirable than people who hadn't signed for cars yet.

One of Grinning Gregory's contract brokers lined us up in a row facing
the path the cars would come by robot direction. The fellow to my right
slicked his hair down neatly and began shining his shoe-tops on the
backs of his trouser legs.

"Sure hope I get selected," he whispered nervously to me. "Boy, don't
you sometimes wish you were living a couple of hundred years ago when
cars were cheap enough so that people were doing the picking?"

"Not me," I told him. "Drive that junk? I'll admit you didn't have to
swear but a couple of years of your life away. But look at all you get
now in a car."

"Mmm, I suppose you're right," he said. "My Orion was stolen a year ago
when I accidentally cut off the burglar photocell. The police never did
find it and I've been trying ever since to get another one."

"This is the first time I've tried," I said. "My car...."

"Ssh," he interrupted. "Here they come."

A procession of new cars, led by a beautiful green Solar convertible,
inched its way along the row of hopeful buyers, all of us with our
credit ratings and car histories pinned to our lapels.

Each car's robot mechanism recorded our statistics, took our pictures,
noted our heights, weights and appearances, then began to correlate the
data.

By government order the robot mechanism was directed to select its
most promising future owner. A sobersides bank president, for example,
might dearly love to change his big black Galaxy sedan for a low-slung
Charioteer sports car, but sports cars were planned with crew-cutted
college boys in mind, so the bank president would be likely to end up
with another big Galaxy. Of course, the payment rate was fixed and the
contracts were almost always for 40 years. A tie salesman might want a
Galaxy to make an impression on his neighbors, but he'd probably wind
up with a Proton or a Thunderflash like I had. I was a tie salesman.

The Solar came abreast of me. I stood straight and smiling as it began
to note my statistics. It flashed a 23 when it was done.

Not so good. That put me in the 23 percentile rank of its desirability.
The next car, a rhinestone Ford, gave me a 28. I was rated 22, 31, 14
(by a Galaxy), 27, 35 and 30 by the next six cars. That was the way it
went for the whole procession. I received the highest rating, 58, from
an experimental model Proton that was no longer in production, but I
knew it was rating everybody higher and I was pretty gloomy.

Imagine my surprise when my name was called out as one of the possible
choices. I went into the broker's office and was told the Proton would
select me if I would get rid of all but ten years of my Thunderflash
contract. That meant I had to find someone to take my car and 27 years
of my contract, since I had been paying for three years of the 40. The
price of the Proton, the broker told me, was scaled down to a 30-year
contract because it was an off-model.

But who would take my heap with a 27-year contract attached to it? The
broker said Grinning Gregory might go for five years, just out of the
goodness of his big, big, big heart. I wouldn't get that kind of a deal
anywhere else, the broker said.

Maybe I wouldn't, but that didn't do me much good. I needed someone to
take 27 years.

Harry! Why didn't I think of Harry before? He didn't have a car yet.
Skinflint Harry didn't want to sign the standard 40-year contract for a
car and he had been shopping around for second-hand cars. Besides, good
old Harry knew how crazy I was about Jenny. He had even taken her out a
couple of times.

I gave Harry an ache on the telephone and told him I'd be right over.
Then I ached the garage and the mechanic told me he could get my
Thunderflash in pretty good running condition again, even though he
couldn't promise anything permanent. I caught a helibus to my friend's
apartment.

"Harry, old pal, I've got the chance of a lifetime for both of us."

Harry eyed me suspiciously. "How's that?" he asked.

"Well, here's the deal. You know my real fine Thunderflash? You said
it was a sharp car. It is. It's a first class car. But ever since that
slight accident, I've had just a wee bit of trouble with it. Not much,
you understand, but it's niggling enough to annoy my girl, Jenny. You
remember Jenny, the girl you used to go with before I cut you out? Ha!
Ha! Anyhow, Jenny wants me to get another car. A newer one."

"But how can you?" Harry asked. "You already have one."

"That's just it, old buddy," I replied. "Grinning Gregory has one of
those experimental model Protons. It's a beauty, shimmering orange with
purple wheels and bearskin upholstery. You'd love it. They'll let me
have it on a 30-year contract if I can sell 27 years of my Thunderflash
contract. So here's what I'm going to do for you, pal. I'll keep ten
years of the contract and let you have the Thunderflash for the rest.
You'll be getting a three-year-old car with 13 years of the contract
taken care of. Now is that a deal or is that a deal!"

Harry wasn't convinced. "What's wrong with your car?"

"Oh, hardly anything."

"What's hardly anything?"

"Not even worth mentioning."

"What's not worth mentioning?"

"To tell the truth, the frame is just the least trifle out of line and
every once in a great while it makes the rear wheel twist sideways."

"I don't know," said Harry.

"Good old cautious, hard-headed Harry," I told him. "You are getting
the deal of a lifetime and doing a good, loyal friend a big favor
besides."

"I still don't know, Arnold," said Harry.

"All right. When will you know?"

"Let me sleep on it tonight."

"OK, Harry."

I went home in high spirits. I knew Harry would come through for me and
take that wreck off my hands. He always was a man with an eye out for a
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

I slept late the next morning, but by afternoon I was over to the used
people lot to tell them to hold the Proton for me for another day.
Instead, they tapped me over the head with the news that someone came
in that morning and bought it. And they didn't have another one like it
that would accept me.

Another hope gone astray! I caught a helibus to the garage and picked
up my Thunderflash after paying a whopping repair bill. I drove to
Jenny's house to convince her it was just as good as new.

Jenny's mother met me at the door.

"Hello, Arnold," she said with the big smile of greeting she always
gave me. "I'm glad to see you and I hope you'll keep dropping over to
see me, but Jenny isn't here any more."

"Not here?"

"I'm afraid not."

"Where is she?"

"She eloped less than an hour ago. You remember the boy she used to
go with, Harry? He came by in a beautiful new car. It was shimmering
orange with purple wheels and bearskin upholstery and...."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Used People Lot, by Irving Fang

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE USED PEOPLE LOT ***

***** This file should be named 60545.txt or 60545.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/5/4/60545/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The Mental Life of Monkeys and Apes, by Robert M. Yerkes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mental Life of Monkeys and Apes
       A Study of Ideational Behavior

Author: Robert M. Yerkes

Release Date: January 27, 2004 [EBook #10843]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MENTAL LIFE OF MONKEYS ***




Produced by Michael Oltz and PG Distributed Proofreaders




The Mental Life of Monkeys and Apes:
  A Study of Ideational Behavior


        ROBERT M. YERKES
       Harvard University




       BEHAVIOR MONOGRAPHS
    Volume 3, Number 1, 1916
        Serial Number 12
    Edited by JOHN B. WATSON
  The Johns Hopkins University


WITH SIX PLATES AND FIVE TEXT FIGURES






CONTENTS

   I. Interests, opportunity and materials

  II. Observational problems and methods

 III. Results of multiple-choice experiments:

    1. Skirrl, _Pithecus irus_
    2. Sobke, _Pithecus rhesus_
    3. Julius, _Pongo pygmaeus_

  IV. Results of supplementary tests of ideational behavior:

    1. Julius, _Pongo pygmaeus_:
        Box stacking experiment
        Box and pole experiment
        Draw-in experiment
        Lock and key test
    2. Skirrl, _Pithecus irus_:
        Box stacking experiment
        Box and pole experiment
        Draw-in experiment
        Hammer and nail test
        Other activities
    3. Sobke, _Pithecus rhesus_:
        Box stacking experiment
        Draw-in experiment
        Box and pole experiment
        Other activities

   V. Miscellaneous observations:

    1. Right- and left-handedness
    2. Instinct and emotion:
        Maternal instinct
        Fear
        Sympathy

  VI. Historical and critical discussion of ideational behavior in
      monkeys and apes:

    1. Evidences of ideation in monkeys
    2. Evidences of ideation in apes

 VII. Provision for the study of the primates and especially the monkeys
      and anthropoid apes

VIII. Bibliography



I

INTERESTS, OPPORTUNITY AND MATERIALS


Two strong interests come to expression in this report: the one in the
study of the adaptive or ideational behavior of the monkeys and the
apes; and the other in adequate and permanent provision for the thorough
study of all aspects of the lives of these animals. The values of these
interests and of the tasks which they have led me to undertake are so
widely recognized by biologists that I need not pause to justify or
define them. I shall, instead, attempt to make a contribution of fact on
the score of each interest.

While recognizing that the task of prospecting for an anthropoid or
primate station may in its outcome prove incomparably more important for
the biological and sociological sciences and for human welfare than my
experimental study of ideational behavior, I give the latter first place
in this report, reserving for the concluding section an account of the
situation regarding our knowledge of the monkeys, apes, and other
primates, and a description of a plan and program for the thorough-going
and long continued study of these organisms in a permanent station or
research institute.

In 1915, a long desired opportunity came to me to devote myself
undividedly to tasks which I have designated above as "prospecting" for
an anthropoid station and experimenting with monkeys and apes. First of
all, the interruption of my academic duties by sabbatical leave gave me
free time. But in addition to this freedom for research, I needed
animals and equipment. These, too, happily, were most satisfactorily
provided, as I shall now describe.

When in 1913, while already myself engaged in seeking the establishment
of an anthropoid station, I heard of the founding of such an institution
at Orotava, Tenerife, the Canary Islands, I immediately made inquiries
of the founder of the station, Doctor Max Rothmann of Berlin, concerning
his plans (Rothmann, 1912).[1] As a result of our correspondence, I was
invited to visit and make use of the facilities of the Orotava station
and to consider with its founder the possibility of co√∂perative work
instead of the establishing of an American station. This invitation I
gratefully accepted with the expectation of spending the greater part of
the year 1915 on the island of Tenerife. But the outbreak of the war
rendered my plan impracticable, while at the same time destroying all
reasonable ground for hope of profitable co√∂peration with the Germans in
the study of the anthropoids. In August, 1915, Doctor Rothmann died.
Presumably, the station still exists at Orotava in the interests of
certain psychological and physiological research. So far as I know,
there are as yet no published reports of studies made at this station.
It seems from every point of view desirable that American psychologists
should, without regard to this initial attempt of the Germans to provide
for anthropoid research, further the establishment of a well equipped
American station for the study not only of the anthropoid apes but of
all of the lower primates.

[Footnote 1: See bibliography at end of report.]

In the early months of the war while I was making every effort to obtain
reliable information concerning conditions in the Canary Islands, I
received an urgent invitation from my friend and former student, Doctor
G. V. Hamilton, to make use of his collection of animals and laboratory
at Montecito, California, during my leave of absence from Harvard. This
invitation I most gladly accepted, and in February, 1915, I established
myself in Santa Barbara, in convenient proximity to Doctor Hamilton's
private laboratory where for more than six months I was able to work
uninterruptedly under nearly ideal conditions.

Doctor Hamilton without reserve placed at my disposal his entire
collection of animals, laboratory, and equipment, provided innumerable
conveniences for my work, and in addition, bore the entire expense of my
investigation. I cannot adequately thank him for his kindness nor make
satisfactory acknowledgment here of his generous aid. Thanks to his
sympathetic interest and to the courtesy of the McCormick family on
whose estate the laboratory was located, my work was done under wholly
delightful conditions, and with assistance from Ramon Jimenez and Frank
Van Den Bergh, Jr., which was invaluable. The former aided me most
intelligently in the care of the animals and the construction of
apparatus; and the latter, especially, was of very real service in
connection with many of my experiments.

The collection of animals which Doctor Hamilton placed at my disposal
consisted of ten monkeys and one orang utan. The monkeys represented
either _Pithecus rhesus_ Audebert (_Macacus rhesus_), _Pithecus irus_ F.
Cuvier (_Macacus cynomolgos_), or the hybrid of these two species
(Elliot, 1913). There were two eunuchs, five males, and three females.
All were thoroughly acclimated, having lived in Montecito either from
birth or for several years. The orang utan was a young specimen of
_Pongo pygmaeus_ Hoppius obtained from a San Francisco dealer in
October, 1914 for my use. His age at that time, as judged by his size
and the presence of milk teeth, was not more than five years. So far as
I could discover, he was a perfectly normal, healthy, and active
individual. On June 10, 1915, his weight was thirty-four pounds, his
height thirty-two inches, and his chest girt twenty-three inches. On
August 18 of the same year, the three measurements were thirty-six and
one-half pounds, thirty-three inches, and twenty-five inches.

For the major portion of my experimental work, only three of the eleven
animals were used. A growing male, _P. rhesus_ monkey, known as Sobke; a
mature male, _P. irus_, called Skirrl; and the young orang utan, which
had been named Julius. Plates I and II present these three subjects of
my experiments in characteristically interesting attitudes. In plate I,
figure 1, Julius appears immediately behind the laboratory seated on a
rock, against a background of live oaks. This figure gives one an
excellent idea of the immediate environment of the laboratory. Figure 2
of the same plate is a portrait of Julius taken in the latter part of
August. By reason of the heavy growth of hair, he appeared considerably
older as well as larger at this time than when the photograph for figure
1 was taken. In plate II, figure 3, Julius is shown in the woods in the
attitude of reaching for a banana, while in figure 4 of the same plate
he is represented as walking upright in one of the cages.

Likenesses of Sobke are presented in figures 5 and 6 of plate II. In the
latter of these figures he is shown stretching his mouth, apparently
yawning but actually preparing for an attack on another monkey behind
the wire screen. Figure 7 of this plate indicates Skirrl in an
interesting attitude of attention and with an obvious lack of
self-consciousness. The same monkey is represented again in figures 8
and 9 of plate II, this time in the act of using hammer and saw.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE II


FIGURE 3.--Orang utan, Julius, reaching for banana.

FIGURE 4.--Julius walking across his cage.

FIGURE 5.--_P. rhesus_, Sobke.

FIGURE 6.--Sobke stretching his jaws (yawn?) preparatory to a fight.

FIGURE 7.--_P. irus_, Skirrl.

FIGURE 8.--Skirrl using hammer and nail.

FIGURE 9.--Skirrl using a saw.



All of the animals except the orang utan had been used more or less for
experiments on behavior by Doctor Hamilton, but this prior work in no
way interfered with my own investigation. Doctor Hamilton has
accumulated a large mass of the most valuable and interesting
observations on the behavior of monkeys, and he more thoroughly
understands them than any other observer of whom I have knowledge. Much
to my regret and embarrassment in connection with the present report, he
has thus far published only a small portion of his data (Hamilton, 1911,
1914). In his most recent paper on "A study of sexual tendencies in
monkeys and baboons," he has given important information concerning
several of the monkeys which I have observed. For the convenience of
readers who may make use of both his reports and mine, I am designating
the animals by the names previously given them by Hamilton. The
available and essential information concerning the individuals is
presented below.



_List of animals in collection_

Skirrl. _Pithecus irus_. Adult male.

Sobke. _P. rhesus_. Young adult male.

Gertie. _P. irus-rhesus_. Female. Born November, 1910.

Maud. _P. rhesus_. Young adult female.

Jimmy II. _P. irus_. Adult male.

Scotty. _P. irus_ (?). Adult male.

Tiny. _P. irus-rhesus_. Female. Born August, 1913.

Chatters. _P. irus_. Adult eunuch.

Daddy. _P. irus_. Adult eunuch.

Mutt. _P. irus_. Young adult male. Born August, 1911.

Julius. _Pongo pygmaeus_. Male. Age, 4 years to 5 years.



When I arrived in Santa Barbara, Doctor Hamilton was about to remodel,
or rather reconstruct, his animal cages and laboratory. This gave us
opportunity to adapt both to the special needs of my experiments. The
laboratory was finally located and built in a grove of live oaks. From
the front it is well shown by figure 10 of plate III, and from the rear,
by figure 11. Its location was in every way satisfactory for my work,
and in addition, the spot proved a delightful one in which to spend
one's time.


[Illustration: FIGURE 12.--Ground plan of Montecito laboratory and
cages. Scale 1/120

L, laboratory; C, cages; A, experiment room in which multiple-choice
apparatus was installed; B, E, additional rooms for research; D, store
room and shop; Z, large central cage communicating with the eight
smaller cages 1-8.]


Figure 12 is a ground plan, drawn to scale, of the laboratory and the
adjoining cages, showing the relations of the several rooms of the
laboratory among themselves and to the nine cages. Although the
construction was throughout simple, everything was convenient and so
planned as to expedite my experimental work. The large room A, adjoining
the cages, was used exclusively for an experimental study of ideational
behavior by means of my recently devised multiple-choice method.
Additional, and supplementary, experiments were conducted in the large
cage Z. Room D served as a store-room and work-shop.

The laboratory was forty feet long, twenty-two feet wide, and ten feet
to the plate. Each small cage was six, by six, by twelve feet deep,
while the large compartment into which each of the smaller cages opened
was twenty-four feet long, ten feet wide, and twelve feet deep.



II

OBSERVATIONAL PROBLEMS AND METHODS


My chief observational task in Montecito was the study of ideational
behavior, or of such adaptive behavior in monkeys and apes as
corresponds to the ideational behavior of man. It was my plan to
determine, so far as possible in the time at my disposal, the existence
or absence of ideas and the r√¥le which they play in the solution of
problems by monkeys and apes. I had in mind the behavioristic form of
the perennial questions: Do these animals think, do they reason, and if
so, what is the nature of these processes as indicated by the
characteristics of their adaptive behavior?

My work, although obviously preliminary and incomplete, differs from
most of the previous studies of the complex behavior of the infrahuman
primates in that I relied chiefly upon a specially devised method and
applied it systematically over a period of several months. The work was
intensive and quantitative instead of more or less incidental, casual,
and qualitative as has usually been the case. Naturally, during the
course of my special study of ideational behavior observations were made
relative to various other aspects of the life of my subjects. Such, for
example, are my notes on the use of the hands, the instincts, the
emotions, and the natural aptitudes of individuals. It is, indeed,
impossible to observe any of the primates without noting most
interesting and illuminating activities. And although the major portion
of my time was spent in hard and monotonous work with my experimental
apparatus, I found time each day to get into intimate touch with the
free activities of my subjects and to observe their social relations and
varied expressions of individuality. As a result of my close
acquaintance with this band of primates, I feel more keenly than ever
before the necessity of taking into account, in connection with all
experimental analyses of behavior, the temperamental characteristics,
experience, and affective peculiarities of individuals.

The light which I have obtained on the general problem of ideation has
come, first, through a method which I have rather inaptly named the
multiple-choice method, and second, and more incidentally, through a
variety of supplementary methods which are described in Section IV of
this report. These supplementary methods are simple tests of ideation
rather than systematic modes of research. They differ from my chief
method, among other respects, in that they have been used by various
investigators during the past ten or fifteen years. It was not my aim to
repeat precisely the observations made by others, but instead to verify
some of them, and more especially, to throw additional light on my main
problem and to further the analysis of complex behavior.

What has been referred to as the multiple-choice method was devised by
me three years ago as a means of obtaining strictly comparable objective
data concerning the problem-solving ability of various types and
conditions of animals. The method was first tried with human subjects in
the Psychopathic Hospital, Boston, with a crude keyboard apparatus
which, however, proved wholly satisfactory as a means of demonstrating
its value. It has since been applied by means of mechanisms especially
adapted to the structure and activities of the organisms, to the study
of the behavior of the crow, pig, rat, and ringdove (Yerkes, 1914;
Coburn and Yerkes, 1915; Yerkes and Coburn, 1915). The method has also
been applied with most gratifying results to the study of the
characteristics of ideational behavior in human defectives,--children,
and adults,--and in subjects afflicted with various forms of mental
disease. It is at present being tried out as a practical test in
connection with vocational guidance and various forms of institutional
examination, such as psychopathic hospital and court examinations.

As no adequate description of the method has yet been published to which
I can here refer, it will be necessary to present its salient
characteristics along with a description of the special form of
apparatus which was found suitable for use with monkeys and apes.

The method is so planned as to enable the observer to present to any
type or condition of organism which he wishes to study any one or all of
a series of problems ranging from the extremely simple to the complex
and difficultly soluble. All of the problems, however, are completely
soluble by an organism of excellent ideational ability. For the human
subject, the solution of the easiest problem of all requires almost no
effort, whereas even moderately difficult problems may require many
repetitions of effort and hours or days of application to the task. In
each case, the solution of the problem depends upon the perception of a
certain constant relation among a series of objects to which the subject
is required to attend and respond. Such relations are, for example,
secondness from one end of the group, middleness, simple alternation of
ends, or progressive movement by constant steps from one end of a group
to the other.

It is possible to present such relational problems by means of
relatively simple reaction-mechanisms. In their essential features, all
of the several types of multiple-choice apparatus designed by the writer
and used either by him or by his students and assistants are the same.
They consist of a series of precisely similar reaction-devices, any one
or all of which may be used in connection with a given observation.
These reaction-mechanisms are so chosen as to be suited to the structure
and action-system of the animal to be studied. For the human being the
mechanism consists of a simple key and the total apparatus is a bank of
keys, with such electrical connections as are necessary to enable the
observer to obtain satisfactory records of the subject's behavior. Let
us suppose the bank of keys, as was actually the case in my first form
of apparatus, to consist of twelve separate reaction-mechanisms; and let
us suppose, further, the constant relation (problem) on the basis of
which the subject is required to react to be that of middleness. It is
evident that in successive trials or experiments the keys must be
presented to the subject in odd groups, the possibilities being groups
of 3, 5, 7, 9, or 11. If for a particular observation the experimenter
wishes to present the first three keys at the left end of the keyboard,
he pushes back the remaining nine keys so that they cannot be operated
and requires the subject to select from the group of three keys the one
which on being pressed causes a signal to appear. It is of course the
clearly understood task of the subject to learn to select the correct
key in the group on first trial. This becomes possible only as the
subject observes the relation of the key which produces the desired
effect to the other keys in the group. On the completion of a subject's
reaction to the group of three keys, a group of seven keys at the
opposite end of the keyboard may, for example, be presented. Similarly,
the subject is required to discover with the minimum number of trials
the correct reaction-mechanism. Thus, time after time, the experimenter
presents a different group of keys so that the subject in no two
successive trials is making use of the same portion of the keyboard. It
is therefore impossible for him to react to spatial relations in the
ordinary sense and manner, and unless he can perceive and appropriately
respond to the particular relation which constitutes the only constant
characteristic of the correct reaction-mechanism for a particular
problem, he cannot solve the problem, or at least cannot solve it
ideationally and on the basis of a small number of observations or
trials.

For the various infrahuman animals whose ideational behavior has been
studied by means of this method, it has been found eminently
satisfactory to use as reaction-mechanisms a series of similar boxes,
each with an entrance and an exit door. An incentive to the selection of
the right box in a particular test is supplied by food, a small quantity
of which is placed in a covered receptacle beyond the exit door of each
of the boxes. Each time an animal enters a wrong box, it is punished for
its mistake by being confined in that box for a certain period, ranging
from five seconds to as much as two minutes with various individuals or
types of organism. This discourages random, hasty, or careless choices.
When the right box is selected, the exit door is immediately raised,
thus uncovering the food, which serves as a reward. After eating the
food thus provided, the animal, according to training, returns to the
starting point and eagerly awaits an opportunity to attempt once more to
find the reward which it has learned to expect. With this form of the
apparatus, the boxes among which choice may be made are indicated by the
raising (opening) of the front door.

Since with various birds and mammals the box form of apparatus had
proved most satisfactory, I planned the primate apparatus along similar
lines, aiming simply to adapt it to the somewhat different motor
equipment and destructive tendencies of the monkeys. I shall now briefly
describe this apparatus as it was constructed and used in the Montecito
laboratory.



EXPLANATION OF PLATE IV

FIGURE 13.--Multiple-choice apparatus, showing observer's bench
   and writing stand.
FIGURE 14.--Apparatus as seen from observer's bench.
FIGURE 15.--Entrances to multiple-choice boxes as seen from
   the response-compartment.
FIGURE 16.--Apparatus as seen from the rear, showing exit
   doors, food receptacles, and covers for same.



The apparatus was built in room A (figure 12), this room having been
especially planned for it with respect to lighting as well as dimensions
and approaches. It was unfortunately impossible to obtain photographs
showing the whole of the apparatus, but it is hoped that the four
partial views of plate IV may aid the reader who is unfamiliar with
previously described similar devices to grasp readily the chief points
of construction. In this plate, figure 13 shows the front of the
complete apparatus, with the alleyway and door by way of which the
experimenter could enter. The investigator's observation-bench and
record-table also appear in this figure, together with weighted cords
used to operate the various doors and the vertically placed levers by
means of which each pair of doors could be locked. Figure 14 is the view
presented to the observer as he stood on the bench or observation stand
of figure 13 and looked over the entire apparatus. Three of the entrance
doors are shown at the right of this figure as raised, whereas the
remainder of the nine entrance doors of the apparatus are closed. Figure
15 is a view of the entrance doors from below the wire roof of the
apparatus. Again, two of the doors are shown as raised, and three
additional ones as closed. The rear of the apparatus appears in figure
16, in which some of the exit doors are closed and others open. In the
latter case, the food receptacles appear, and on the lower part of the
raised doors of the corresponding boxes may be seen metal covers for the
food receptacles projecting at right angles to the doors, while on the
lower edge of each door is an iron staple used to receive a sliding bar
which could be operated from the observer's bench as a means of locking
the doors after they had been closed. The space beyond the exit doors
was used as an alleyway for the return of the animals to the starting
point.

It will be necessary at various points in later descriptions to refer to
these several figures. But further description of them will be more
readily appreciated after a careful examination of the ground plan of
the apparatus presented as figure 17 In accordance with the labelling of
this figure, the experimenter enters the apparatus room through doorway
16, passes thence through doorways 17 and 10 to the large cage Z, from
which he has direct access to the animals and can bring them into the
apparatus. The multiple-choice mechanism proper, consisting of nine
similar boxes (nine were used instead of twelve as a matter of
convenience of construction, not because this smaller number is
otherwise preferable) is labelled F. These boxes are numbered 1 to 9,
beginning at the left. This numbering was adhered to in the recording of
results throughout the investigation. The other important portions of
the apparatus are the runway D, from which the subject at the
experimenter's pleasure could be admitted through doorway 12 to the
large response-chamber E; the alleyways G, H, and I, by way of which
return to the starting point was possible; the observation bench C, with
its approach step 13; and the observer's writing table A.

In the construction of this large apparatus, it was necessary to make
provision for the extremely destructive tendencies of monkeys and
anthropoid apes,--hence the apparent cumbersomeness of certain portions.
It was equally necessary to provide for the protection of the observer
and the prevention of escape of the subjects by completely covering the
apparatus and alleyways with a heavy wire netting.

Each of the eighteen doors of the multiple-choice boxes, and in addition
doors 11, 12, and 15 of the runway D, were operated by the observer from
his bench C by means of weighted window cords which were carried by
pulleys appropriately placed above the apparatus. Each weight was so
chosen as to be just sufficient to hold its door in position after the
experimenter had raised it. For the convenience of the experimenter in
the rapid operation of the twenty-one doors, the weights for the doors
of runway D were painted gray, those for the entrance doors, white, and
those for the exit doors, black.

In each entrance door, as is shown in figure 15 of plate IV, a window
was cut so that the experimenter might watch the animal after it had
entered a given box, and especially note when it left the box after
having received its reward. This window was covered with wire netting.
No such windows were necessary in the exit doors, but to them were
attached heavy galvanized iron flanges which served to cover the food
receptacles. One of these flanges is labelled o in figure 17. The food
receptacles were provided by boring holes in a 2 by 4 inch timber
securely nailed to the floor immediately outside of the exit doors. Into
these holes aluminum cups fitted snugly, and the iron flanges, when the
doors were closed, fitted so closely over the cups that it was
impossible for the animals to obtain food from them.


[Illustration: FIGURE 17.--Ground plan of multiple-choice apparatus in
experiment room A. Scale 1/60

A, record stand; C, bench for observer; B, step as approach to C; D,
alleyway leading to E, response-compartment; F, one of the nine (1-9)
similar multiple-choice boxes; G, H, alleyways leading from boxes to
starting point at D; I, alleyway used by experimenter as approach to
rear of apparatus; W, W, windows; P, alleyway; Z, large cage; 16,
entrance to room A; 17, entrance to apparatus and thence via 10 to
cages; 18, entrance to alleyway 1; 11, 15, entrances to D; 12, entrance
to E; 13, entrance door of box 5; 14, exit door of box 5; o, cover for
food receptacle.]


As originally constructed, no provision was made in the apparatus for
locking the entrance and exit doors of the several boxes when they were
closed. But as two of the subjects after a time learned to open the
doors from either outside or inside the boxes, it became necessary to
introduce locking devices which could be operated by the experimenter
from the observation bench. This was readily accomplished by cutting
holes in the floor, which permitted an iron staple, screwed to the lower
edge of each door, to project through the floor. Through these staples
by means of a lever for each of the nine boxes, the observer was able to
slide a wooden bar, placed beneath the floor of the room, thus locking
or unlocking either the entrance door, the exit door, or both, in the
case of any one of the nine boxes.

Since figure 17 is drawn to scale, it will be needless to give more than
a few of the dimensions of the apparatus. Each of the boxes was 42
inches long, 18 inches wide, and 72 inches deep, inside measurements.
The alleys D, I, and H were 24 inches, and G 30 inches wide, by 6 feet
deep. The doors of the several boxes were 18 inches wide, by 5 feet
high, while those in the alleyways were 24 inches wide by 6 feet high.
The response-compartment E of figure 17 was 14 feet 4 inches, by 8 feet,
by 6 feet in depth. In order that the apparatus might be used with adult
human subjects conveniently, if such use should prove desirable, the
depth throughout was made 6 feet, and it was therefore possible for the
experimenter to walk about erect in it.

The experimental procedure was briefly as follows: A small quantity of
food having been placed in each of the food cups and covered by the
metal flanges on the exit doors, the experimenter raised door 11 of
figure 17 and then opened door 10 and the door of the cage in which the
desired subject was confined. After the latter, in search of food, had
entered the runway D, the experimenter lowered door 11 to keep it in
this runway, and immediately proceeded to set the reaction-mechanisms
for an experiment (trial). Let us suppose that the first setting to be
tried involved all of the nine boxes. Each of the entrance doors would
therefore be raised. Let us further suppose that the right door is
defined as the middle one of the group. With the apparatus properly set,
the experimenter next raises door 12, thus admitting the animal to the
response-compartment E. Any one of the nine boxes may now be entered by
it. But if any except number 5, the middle member of the group, be
entered, the entrance door is immediately lowered and both the exit and
entrance doors locked in position so that the animal is forced to remain
in the box for a stated period, say thirty seconds. At the expiration of
this time the entrance door is raised and the animal allowed to retrace
its steps and make another choice. When the middle box is chosen, the
entrance door is lowered and the exit door immediately raised, thus
uncovering the food, which the animal eats. As a rule, by my monkeys and
ape the reward was eaten in the alleyway G instead of in the
multiple-choice box. As soon as the food has been eaten, the exit door
is lowered by the experimenter, and the animal returns by way of G and H
to runway D, where it awaits its next trial.

As rewards, bananas and peanuts were found very satisfactory, and
although occasionally other foods were supplied in small quantities,
they were on the whole less constantly desired than the former.

Four problems which had previously been presented to other organisms
were in precisely the same form presented to the three primates. These
problems may be described, briefly, by definition of the right reaction
mechanism, thus: problem 1, the first mechanism at the subject's left;
problem 2, the second mechanism at the subject's right (that is, from
the end of the series at the subject's right); problem 3, alternately,
the first mechanism at the subject's left and the first at its right;
problem 4, the middle mechanism of the group.

It was my intention to present these four problems, in order, to each of
the three animals, proceeding with them as rapidly as they were solved.
But as it happened, only one of the three subjects got as far as the
fourth problem. When observations had to be discontinued, Sobke was well
along with the last, or fourth problem; Skirrl was at work at the third
problem; and Julius had failed to solve the second problem.

For each of the problems, a series of ten different settings of the
doors was determined upon in advance. These settings differ from those
employed in a similar investigation with the pig only in that the
numbering of the doors is reversed. In the present apparatus, the boxes
as viewed from the front (entrance) are numbered from the left to the
right end, whereas those of the pig apparatus were numbered from the
right end to the left end.

Below are presented for each of the several problems (1) the numbers of
the settings presented in series; (2) the numbers of the doors open; (3)
the number of doors open in each setting and for the series of ten
settings; and (4) the number of the right door.



PROBLEM 1. First mechanism at left of group

                   Doors                     No. of            No. of
Settings           open                    doors open       right door
 1..................1.2.3......................3..................1
 2..................8.9........................2..................8
 3..................3.4.5.6.7..................5..................3
 4..................7.8.9......................3..................7
 5..................2.3.4.5.6..................5..................2
 6..................6.7.8......................3..................6
 7..................5.6.7......................3..................5
 8..................4.5.6.7.8..................5..................4
 9..................7.8.9......................3..................7
10..................1.2.3......................3..................1
                                              --
                                        Total 35


PROBLEM 2.  Second mechanism from the right end of group

                   Doors                    No. of             No. of
Settings           open                   doors open        right door
 1..................7.8.9......................3..................8
 2..................1.2.3.4....................4..................3
 3..................2.3.4.5.6.7................6..................6
 4..................1.2.3.4.5.6................6..................5
 5..................4.5.6.7.8..................5..................7
 6..................1.2.3......................3..................2
 7..................2.3.4.5....................4..................4
 8..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9..........9..................8
 9..................1.2.3.4....................4..................3
10..................3.4.5.6.7.8................6..................7
                                              --
                                        Total 50


PROBLEM 3.  Alternately the first mechanism at the left and the
                    first at the right end of the group

                   Doors                    No. of             No. of
Settings           open                   doors open        right door
 1..................5.6.7......................3..................5
 2..................5.6.7......................3..................7
 3..................1.2.3.4.5.6................6..................1
 4..................1.2.3.4.5.6................6..................6
 5..................4.5.6.7.8..................5..................4
 6..................4.5.6.7.8..................5..................8
 7..................2.3.4.5....................4..................2
 8..................2.3.4.5....................4..................5
 9..................3.4.5.6.7.8.9..............7..................3
10..................3.4.5.6.7.8.9..............7..................9
                                              --
                                        Total 50


PROBLEM 4.  Middle mechanism of the group

                   Doors                    No. of             No. of
Settings           open                   doors open        right door
 1..................2.3.4......................3..................3
 2..................5.6.7.8.9..................5..................7
 3..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7..............7..................4
 4..................7.8.9......................3..................8
 5..................4.5.6.7.8..................5..................6
 6..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9..........9..................5
 7..................1.2.3......................3..................2
 8..................2.3.4.5.6..................5..................4
 9..................3.4.5.6.7.8.9..............7..................6
10..................6.7.8......................3..................7
                                              --
                                        Total 50



It was found desirable after a problem had been solved to present a new
and radically different series of settings in order to determine to what
extent the subject had learned to choose the correct door by memorizing
each particular setting. These supplementary observations may be known
as control experiments, and the settings as supplementary settings. In
case of these, as for the original settings, the essential facts are
presented in tabular arrangement.



Settings for Control Experiments

PROBLEM 1.  First at left end

                   Doors                    No. of             No. of
Settings           open                   doors open       right door
 1..................2.3.4......................3..................2
 2..................6.7.8.9....................4..................6
 3..................3.4.5......................3..................3
 4..................4.5.6.7.8.9................6..................4
 5..................6.7.8.9....................4..................6
 6..................1.2.3.4.5..................5..................1
 7..................2.3.4.5.6.7.8..............7..................2
 8..................3.4.5.6.7.8................6..................3
 9..................5.6.7......................3..................5
10..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9..........9..................1


PROBLEM 2.  Second from right end

                   Doors                    No. of             No. of
Settings           open                   doors open        right door
 1..................5.6.7.8....................4..................7
 2..................2.3.4.5.6..................5..................5
 3..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9..........9..................8
 4..................5.6.7......................3..................6
 5..................1.2.3.4....................4..................3
 6..................4.5.6......................3..................5
 7..................2.3.4.5....................4..................4
 8..................1.2.3......................3..................2
 9..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7..............7..................6
10..................2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9............8..................8


PROBLEM 3.  Alternate left and right ends

                   Doors                    No. of             No. of
Settings            open                  doors open        right door
 1..................5.6........................2..................5
 2..................5.6........................2..................6
 3..................4.5.6.7.8.9................6..................4
 4..................4.5.6.7.8.9................6..................9
 5..................1.2.3.4.5..................5..................1
 6..................1.2.3.4.5..................5..................5
 7..................2.3.4.5.6.7................6..................2
 8..................2.3.4.5.6.7................6..................7
 9..................3.4.5.6.7.8................6..................3
10..................3.4.5.6.7.8................6..................8


PROBLEM 4.  Middle

                   Doors                    No. of             No. of
Settings           open                   doors open        right door
 1..................4.5.6.7.8..................5..................6
 2..................1.2.3......................3..................2
 3..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9..........9..................5
 4..................2.3.4.5.6..................5..................4
 5..................6.7.8......................3..................7
 6..................3.4.5.6.7.8.9..............7..................6
 7..................7.8.9......................3..................8
 8..................1.2.3.4.5.6.7..............7..................4
 9..................2.3.4......................3..................3
10..................3.4.5.6.7..................5..................5



It was my aim so far as possible to present to a given subject each day
the ten settings under a given problem in order, without interruption.
If for any reason the series of observations had to be interrupted, it
was resumed at the same point subsequently. Occasionally it was found
desirable or necessary to present only five of the series of ten
settings in succession and then to interrupt observations for an
interval of a few minutes or even several hours. But as a rule it was
possible to present the series of ten settings. All things being
considered, it proved more satisfactory to give only ten trials a day to
each subject. Frequently twenty and rarely thirty trials were given on
the same day. In such cases the series of settings was simply repeated.
The only pause between trials was that necessary for resetting the
entrance doors and replenishing the food which served as a reward for
success.



III

RESULTS OF MULTIPLE-CHOICE EXPERIMENTS


1. Skirrl, _Pithecus irus_

_Problem 1. First at the Left End_


Systematic work with the multiple-choice apparatus and method described
in the previous section was undertaken early in April with Skirrl,
Sobke, and Julius. The results for each of them are now to be presented
with such measure of detail as their importance seems to justify.

Skirrl had previously been used by Doctor Hamilton in an experimental
study of reactive tendencies. He proved so remarkably inefficient in the
work that Doctor Hamilton was led to characterize him as feeble-minded,
and to recommend him to me for further study because of his mental
peculiarities. With me he was from the first frank, aggressive, and
inclined to be savage. It was soon possible for me to go into the large
cage, Z, with him and allow him to take food from my hand. He was
without fear of the experimental apparatus and it proved relatively easy
to accustom him to the routine of the experiment. Throughout the work he
was rather slow, inattentive, and erratic.

Beginning on April 7, I sought to acquaint him with the multiple-choice
apparatus by allowing him to make trips through the several boxes, with
the reward of food each time. Thus, for example, with the entrance and
exit doors of box 7 raised, the monkey was allowed to pass into the
reaction-compartment E and thence through box 7 to the food cup. As soon
as he had finished eating, he was called back to D by the experimenter
and, after a few seconds, allowed, similarly, to make a trip by way of
one of the other boxes. By reason of this preliminary training he soon
came to seek eagerly for the reward of food.

On April 10 the apparatus was painted white in order to increase the
lightness and thus render it easier for the experimenter to observe the
animal's movements, and when on April 12 Skirrl was again introduced to
it for further preliminary training, he utterly refused to enter the
boxes, giving every indication of extreme fear of the white floors and
even of the sides of the boxes. Finally, the attempts to induce him to
enter the boxes had to be given up, and he was returned to his cage
unfed. The following day I was equally unsuccessful in either driving or
tempting him with food into the apparatus. But on April 14 he was so
hungry that he was finally lured in by the use of food. He cautiously
approached the boxes and attempted to climb through on the sides instead
of walking on the floor. It was perfectly evident that he had an
instinctive or an acquired fear of the white surfaces. As the matter was
of prime importance for the success of my work, I inquired of Doctor
Hamilton, and of the men in charge of the cages, for any incident which
might account for this peculiar behavior, and I learned that some three
months earlier, while the animal cages were being whitewashed, Skirrl
had jumped at one of the laborers who was applying a brush to the
framework of one of the cages and had shaken some lime into his eyes. He
was greatly frightened and enraged. Evidently he experienced extreme
discomfort, if not acute pain, and there resulted an association with
whiteness which was quite sufficient to cause him to avoid the freshly
painted apparatus.

Having obtained an adequate explanation of this monkey's peculiar
behavior, I proceeded with my efforts to induce him to work smoothly and
rapidly, and on April 15, by covering the floor with sawdust, I so
diminished the influence of the whiteness as to render the preliminary
training fairly satisfactory. At the end of two more days everything was
going so well that it seemed desirable to begin the regular experiment.

On the morning of April 19, Skirrl was introduced to the apparatus and
given his first series of ten trials on problem 1. This problem demanded
the selection of the first door at the left in any group of open doors.
The procedure was as previously described in that the experimenter
raised the entrance doors of a certain group of boxes, admitted the
animal to the reaction-chamber, punished incorrect choices by confining
the animal for thirty seconds, and rewarded correct choices by raising
the exit door and thus permitting escape and the obtaining of food. The
trials were given in rapid succession, and the total time required for
this first series of ten trials was thirty-five minutes. Skirrl worked
faithfully throughout this interval and exhibited no marked
discouragement. When confined in a box he showed uneasiness and
dissatisfaction by moving about constantly, shaking the doors, and
trying to raise them in order to escape.

For the series of settings used in connection with problem 1, the reader
is referred to page 18. In the first setting, the doors numbered 1, 2,
and 3, were opened. As it happened, the animal when admitted to the
reaction-chamber immediately chose box l. Having received the reward of
food, he was called back to D, and doors 8 and 9 having been raised in
preparation for the next trial, he was again admitted to the
reaction-chamber. This time he quickly chose box 9 and was confined
therein for thirty seconds. On being released, he chose after an
interval of four minutes, box 8, thus completing the trial.

As it is highly important, not only in connection with the present
description of behavior, but also for subsequent comparison of the
reactions of different types of organism in this experiment, to present
the detailed records for each trial, tables have been constructed which
offer in brief space the essential data for every trial in connection
with a given problem.

Table 1 contains the results for Skirrl in problem 1. It is constructed
as follows: the date of a series of trials appears in the first vertical
column; the numbers (and number) of the trials for the series or date
appear in column 2; the following ten columns present respectively the
results of the trials for each of the ten settings. Each number, in
these results, designates a box entered. At the extreme right of the
table are three columns which indicate, first, the number of trials in
which the right box was chosen first, column headed R; and second, the
number of trials in which at least one incorrect choice occurred, column
headed W. In the last column, the daily ratio of these first choices
appears.

Taking the first line of table 1 below the explanatory headings, we note
on April 19 ten trials, numbered 1 to 10, were given to Skirrl. In trial
1, with setting 1, he chose correctly the first time, and the record is
therefore simply 1. In trial 2, setting 2, he incorrectly chose box 9,
the first time. At his next opportunity, he chose box 8, which was the
right one. The record therefore reads 9.8. In trial 3, setting 3, he
chose incorrectly twice before finally selecting the right box. The
record reads 6.7.3, and so on throughout the ten trials which constitute
a series. The summary for this series indicates three right and seven
wrong first choices, that is, three cases in which the right box was
entered first. The ratio of right to wrong first choices is therefore 1
to 2.33. Since the total number of doors open in the ten settings is
thirty-five, and since in each of the ten settings one door is
describable as the right door, the probable ratio, apart from the
effects of training, of right to wrong first choices is 1 to 2.50. It is
evident, therefore, that Skirrl in his first series of trials closely
approximated expectation in the number of mistakes.



TABLE 1

Results for Skirrl, _P. irus_, in Problem 1

========+==========+=========+=========+===========+=============+===========+===========+===========+=============+===========+===========+===+===+========
        |    No.   |   S.1   |   S.2   |    S.3    |     S.4     |    S.5    |    S.6    |    S.7    |     S.8     |    S.9    |   S.10    |   |   | Ratio
Date    |    of    |         |         |           |             |           |           |           |             |           |           | R | W |   of
        |  trials  |  1.2.3  |   8.9   | 3.4.5.6.7 |    7.8.9    | 2.3.4.5.6 |   6.7.8   |   5.6.7   |  4.5.6.7.8  |   7.8.9   |   1.2.3   |   |   | R to W
--------+----------+---------+---------+-----------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------+-----------+-----------+---+---+--------
 April  |          |         |         |           |             |           |           |           |             |           |           |   |   |
  19    |   1-  10 | 1       | 9.8     | 6.7.3     | 9.7         | 6.2       | 7.8.6     | {6.7.7.7  | 4           | 7         | 2.3.3.1   | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
        |          |         |         |           |             |           |           | {6.5      |             |           |           |   |   |
        |          |         |         |           |             |           |           |           |             |           |           |   |   |
  20    |  11-  20 | 3.2.1   | 9.8     | 5.3       | 7           | 4.2       | 8.8.6     | 5         | 8.4         | 7         | 3.1       | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
  21    |  21-  30 | 3.1     | 8       | 3         | 8.7         | 6.2       | 6         | 5         | 6.4         | 9.7       | 1         | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
  22    |  31-  40 | 1       | 9.8     | 3         | 7           | 6.2       | 6         | 6.7.5     | 5.8.4       | 9.8.9.8.7 | 2.1       | 4 | 6 | 1:1.50
  23    |  41-  50 | 2.3.1   | 8       | 5.7.3     | 7           | 4.2       | 6         | 5         | 7.8.4       | 7         | 3.1       | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
  24    |  51-  60 | 1       | 8       | 4.5.7.3   | 9.7         | 5.6.2     | 6         | 6.7.5     | 6.4         | 8.9.7     | 1         | 4 | 6 | 1:1.50
  26    |  61-  70 | 1       | 8       | 6.7.4.7.3 | 7           | 4.5.6.2   | 6         | 5         | 8.4         | 7         | 3.2.3.1   | 6 | 4 | 1: .67
  27    |  71-  80 | 3.1     | 8       | 3         | 9.7         | 4.6.2     | 7.6       | 6.5       | 5.8.4       | 7         | 1         | 4 | 6 | 1:1.50
  28    |  81-  90 | 2.3.1   | 8       | 3         | 7           | 4.5.6.2   | 6         | 5         | 5.8.4       | 7         | 1         | 7 | 3 | 1: .43
  29    |  91- 100 | 1       | 8       | 3         | 9.7         | 6.2       | 6         | 5         | 4           | 7         | 1         | 8 | 2 | 1: .25
  30    | 101- 110 | 1       | 8       | 4.3       | 7           | 5.6.2     | 6         | 5         | 4           | 7         | 2.3.1     | 7 | 3 | 1: .43
  May   |          |         |         |           |             |           |           |           |             |           |           |   |   |
   1    | 111- 120 | 2.3.2.1 | 8       | 3         | 7           | 2         | 6         | 5         | 4           | 7         | 1         | 9 | 1 | 1: .11
   3    | 121- 130 | 1       | 8       | 5.6.3     | 7           | 4.5.2     | 6         | 5         | 4           | 7         | 1         | 8 | 2 | 1: .25
4 and 5 | 131- 140 | 3.2.1   | 8[1]    | 3         | 7           | 2         | 6         | 5         | 4           | 7         | 1         | 9 | 1 | 1: .11
   5    | 141- 150 | 1       | 8       | 4.3       | 7           | 2         | 6         | 5         | 4           | 7         | 1         | 9 | 1 | 1: .11
--------+----------+---------+---------+-----------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------+-----------+-----------+---+---+--------
        |          |         |         |           |             |           |           |  2.3.4.5  |             |           | 1.2.3.4.5 |   |   |
        |          |  2.3.4  | 6.7.8.9 |   3.4.5   | 4.5.6.7.8.9 |  6.7.8.9  | 1.2.3.4.5 |   6.7.8   | 3.4.5.6.7.8 |   5.6.7   |  6.7.8.9  |   |   |
        |          +---------+---------+-----------+-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------+-----------+-----------+---+---+--------
   6    |   1-  10 | 2       | 6       | 3         | 4           | 6         | 3.2.1     | 6.2       |  5.6.7.8.3  | 5         | 6.1       | 6 | 4 | 1: .67
========+==========+=========+=========+===========+=============+===========+===========+===========+=============+===========+===========+===+===+========

[Footnote 1: End of series on May 4.]



By reading downward in any particular column of results, one obtains a
description of the changes in the animal's reaction to a particular
setting of the doors. Thus, for instance, in the case of setting 1,
which was presented to the animal in trials numbered 1, 11, 21, and so
on to 141, it is clear from the records that no definite improvement
occurred. But oddly enough, in the case of setting 10, which presented
the same group of open doors, almost all of the reactions are right in
the lower half of the column. For setting 2, it is evident that mistakes
soon disappeared.

Comparison of the data of table 1 indicates that the number of correct
first choices is inversely proportional to the number of doors in use,
while the number of choices made in a given trial is directly
proportional to the number of doors in use.

During the first week of work on this problem, Skirrl improved markedly.
His performance was somewhat irregular and unpredictable, but on the
whole the experiment seemed fairly satisfactory. Cold, cloudy, or rainy
days tended to diminish steadiness and to increase the number of
mistakes. Similarly, absence of hunger was unfavorable to continuous
effort to find the right box.

The period of confinement, as punishment for wrong choices, was
increased from thirty seconds to sixty seconds on April 26. But there is
no satisfactory evidence that this favored the solution of the problem.
Work on May 4 was interrupted by a severe storm, the noise of which so
distracted the monkey that he ceased to work. Consequently, observations
were interrupted on the completion of trial 132, and on May 5, the
series was begun with setting 3. On this date, eighteen trials were
given in succession, and in only one of them did a mistake occur. Since
the ten trials numbered 133 to 142 were correct, Skirrl was considered
to have solved problem 1, and systematic training was discontinued.

On the following day, as a measure of the extent to which the animal had
learned to select the first door at the left no matter what its position
or the number of doors in the group presented, a control series was
given in which the settings differed from the regular series of
settings. These supplementary settings are presented at the bottom of
table 1 together with the records of reaction in ten trials.

Since in only six of these ten control settings was the first choice
correct, it is scarcely fair to insist that the animal was reacting on
the basis of an ideational solution of the problem. Rather, it would
seem that he had learned to react to particular settings. A careful
study of all of the data of response, together with notes on the varied
behavior of the animal during the experiments, justifies the statement
that Skirrl's solution of problem 1 was incomplete and unreliable. It
was highly dependent upon the particular situation, or even the
particular door at the left end of the group, and slightly if at all
dependent upon anything comparable to the human idea of first at the
left of the group.

This particular series of observations has been described and discussed
in some detail in order to make the chief points of method clear. It
will be needless, hereafter, to refer explicitly to many of the
characteristics of reaction or to the important points in the
construction of tables which have been mentioned.

A graphic representation of Skirrl's learning process in problem 1 is
presented in figure 18. The irregularities are most striking, and fairly
indicate the erraticness of the animal. The curve is based upon the data
in next to the last column of table 1, that is, the column presenting
the errors or wrong first choices in each series of trials.

Unquestionably, the form of such a curve of learning should be
considered in connection with the method or methods of selecting the
right box employed by the animal during the course of experimentation.
It appears from an analysis of the behavior of Skirrl in problem 1 that
there developed a single definite and persistent method, namely, that of
going to one box in the group, and in case it happened to be a wrong
one, of choosing, on emergence from it, the next toward the right end of
the group, and so on down the line. Having reached the extreme right
end, the tendency was to follow the side of the reaction-chamber around
to the opposite end and to enter the first box at the left end of the
group, which was, of course, the right one. This method appears, with
certain slight variations, in approximately ninety per cent of the
trials which involved incorrect choices. Thus, in the case of trials 121
to 130, of which eight exhibit right first choices, the remaining two
exhibit the method described above except that the final member at the
right end of the group was in each case omitted.

[Illustration: FIGURE 18.--Error curves of learning for the solution of
problem 1 (first box at left end).]

On the whole, Skirrl's behavior in connection with this problem appears
to indicate a low order of intelligence. He persisted in such stupid
acts as that of turning, after emergence from the right box, toward the
right and passing into the blind alley I, instead of toward the left,
through G and H, to D. In contrast with the other animals, he spent much
time before the closed doors of the boxes, instead of going directly to
the open doors, some one of which marked the box in which the reward of
food could be obtained. It is, moreover, obvious that his responses, as
they appear in table 1, are extremely different from those of a human
being who is capable of bringing the idea of first at the left end to
bear upon the problem in question.


_Problem 2. Second from the Right End_

Following the series of control trials of problem 1 given to Skirrl on
May 6, a period of four days was allowed during which the animal was
merely fed in the boxes each day. This was done in order that he should
partially lose the effects of his previous training to choose the first
box at the left before being presented with the second problem, the
second box from the right.

On May 11 regular experimentation was begun with problem 2. Naturally
the situation presented unusual difficulties to the monkey because of
his previously acquired habit, and on the first day it was possible to
give only five trials, in all except the first of which Skirrl had to be
aided by the experimenter to find the right box. He persistently, as
appears in the first line of records of table 2, entered the first box
at the left. The series was continued on May 13, but with very
unsatisfactory results, since he apparently had been greatly discouraged
by the unusual difficulties previously met. Only four trials could be
given, and in these the showing made was very poor. It is noteworthy,
however, that in trials 6, 7, and 8, May 13, there was no marked
tendency to choose the first box at the left. Thus quickly had the force
of the previous habit been broken.

For problem 2, the total number of open doors in the ten settings is
fifty, as appears from the data on page 18, and as ten of these fifty
open doors may be defined as right ones, the expected ratio of right to
wrong first choices in the absence of previous training is 1 to 4. The
actual ratio for the first series given in problem 2 is 1 to 8, while in
the second series it is 0 to 10.

On the morning of May 13, work was interrupted in the ninth trial by
what seemed at the moment a peculiarly unfortunate accident, but in the
light of later developments, an incident most fruitful of valuable
results.

Skirrl, in trial 9, directly entered box 1. Since this was not the right
box, he was punished by being confined in it for ten seconds. While in
the box he howled and when the entrance door was raised for him to
retrace his steps, he came out with a rush, showing extreme excitement
and either rage or fear, I could not be sure which. At intervals he
uttered loud cries, which I am now able to identify as cries of alarm.
Repeatedly he went to the open door of box 1 and peered in, or peered
down through the hole in the floor which received the staple on the
door. He refused to enter any one of the open boxes and continued, at
intervals of every half minute or so, his cries. For thirty minutes I
waited, hoping to be able to induce him to complete the series of
trials, but in vain. Although it was obvious that he was eager to escape
from the apparatus, he would not enter any of the boxes even when the
exit doors were raised. Instead, he gnawed at the door (12 in fig. 17)
to the alleyway D and attempted to force his way through, instead of
taking the easy and clear route to the alleys, through one of the boxes.
His behavior was most surprising and puzzling. Finally, I gave up the
attempt to complete the series and returned him to his cage by way of
the entrance door to the response-compartment E.

I then entered the apparatus to seek some explanation of the animal's
behavior, and my search was rewarded by the finding of two sharp pointed
nails which protruded for an inch or more in the middle of the floor of
box 1. My assistant, who had been charged with the task of installing
the locks for the several doors, had used nails instead of screws for
attaching staples underneath the floor and had neglected to clinch the
nails. Skirrl, in the dim light of the box, doubtless stepped upon one
of the nails and inflicted a painful, although not serious, injury upon
himself. It was impossible for him to see clearly the source of his
injury. He was greatly frightened and expressed the emotion most
vigorously. His behavior strongly suggested a superstitious dread of
some unseen danger. It may be that the instinctive fear of snakes, so
strong in monkeys, was partly responsible for his response.

The first result of this accident was that more than two weeks were
lost, for it was impossible, during the next few days, to induce the
animal to enter any of the multiple-choice boxes voluntarily. From May
14 to May 24, I labored daily to overcome his newly acquired fear. The
usual procedure was to coax him through one box after another by
standing at the exit door with some tempting morsel of food. After
several days of this treatment, he again trusted himself to the boxes,
although very circumspectly and only when both entrance and exit doors
were raised. Not until May 24 was it possible to resume regular
experimentation, and on that day it was found necessary to indicate the
right box by raising the exit door slightly and then immediately
lowering it. Trials in which this form of aid was given are indicated in
table 2 by a star following the last choice.

Gradually, Skirrl regained his confidence in the apparatus and began to
work more naturally. For a long time he would not stand punishment, and
it was necessary for the experimenter to be very careful in locking the
doors, since the sound of the bar sliding beneath the floor often
frightened and caused him to quit work. Day after day the tendency to
peer through the holes in the floor at the entrance to the boxes
rendered it clear that the animal feared some danger from beneath the
floor. This behavior was so persistent that much time was wasted in the
experiments.

On the last day of May, punishment by confinement for ten seconds in
wrong boxes was introduced, but since this tended to discourage the
monkey, there was substituted for it on June 1 the punishment of forcing
him to work his way out of each wrong box by raising the entrance door
which had been closed behind him. This he could fairly readily do, and
his stay in a box rarely measured more than ten seconds.

As a variation in the mode of procedure, confinement for thirty seconds
was tried on June 5, but it worked unsatisfactorily and had to be
abandoned. During this series, the animal was startled by the sound from
one of the sliding bars under the floor, and in the sixth trial he
refused to work.

As improvement was very slow, varied modes of rewarding and punishing
the animal were tried in the hope of discovering a means of facilitating
the work. Among the former are the use of banana, grapes, peanuts, and
other eagerly sought foods in varying quantities, and in the latter are
included periods of confinement ranging from ten seconds to sixty
seconds. In the end, confinement of about thirty seconds, combined with
a small quantity of food which was much to the monkey's taste, gave most
favorable results.

All this time Skirrl's attention to the task in hand was seldom good. He
was easily diverted and even when extremely hungry, often stopped work
in the middle of an early trial, yawned repeatedly and finally sat down
to wait for release from the apparatus.

The results obtained during the long continued trials with this animal
in problem 2 are presented in table 2, which differs from the previously
described table, first, in that several of the trials are followed by an
asterisk to indicate that aid was given by the experimenter, and second,
in that two additional columns, headed, respectively, R and W, are
presented. These give the right and wrong first choices for each day,
whereas the two columns preceding them give the same data for each
series of ten trials. Similarly, the ratio of right to wrong choices is
presented for each day in table 2, instead of for each series of ten
trials as in table 1.

From the results of table 2, several peculiarly interesting facts
appear. In the first place the influence of the habit of choosing the
first box at the left disappears with surprising suddenness, and in the
second place, there are remarkable contrasts in the results for
different settings as they appear in their respective vertical columns.
Thus, in the case of setting 1, after the first trial mistakes became
relatively infrequent, whereas in setting 6, which involved the same
number of doors, mistakes continued to be the rule until nearly a
thousand trials had been given. The most likely explanation of this
difference is that for some reason the animal avoided box 9.

The _reactive tendencies_, or better, the _methods of reaction_ which
manifested themselves during this long series of observations may be
described as follows: (a) choice of the first box at the left; (b)
random choice with tendency to choose first, a box near the middle of
the group; (c) choice of first box at the right followed by the one next
to it on the left; (d) direct choice of the right box.



TABLE 2

Results for Skirrl, _P. irus_, in Problem 2


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  1.2.3.4.5   |              |              | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |    7.8.9     |   1.2.3.4    | 2.3.4.5.6.7  | 1.2.3.4.5.6  |  4.5.6.7.8   |    1.2.3     |   2.3.4.5    |   6.7.8.9    |   1.2.3.4    | 3.4.5.6.7.8  |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
  May   |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
 11&13  |    1-   9 | 7.7.9.7.8    | {1.2.2.1.4.1 | {2.3.2.3.2.5 | {4.6.1.4.1.1 | 4.4.7        | 3.1.2        | 4            | 4.1.8        | 1            |              | 1 | 8 | 1 | 8 | 1: 8.00
        |           |              | {2.1.2.1.3   | {2.3.2.5.6   | {2.6.1.6.5   |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   24   |   11-  20 | 8*[1]        | 2.4.3*       | 4.5.6*       | 2.2.5*       | 5.6.6.7*     | 3.1.2        | {5.2.3.5.3.2 | 4.6.8*       | 4.4.3*       | 5.5.6.7*     | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {3.5.2.4*    |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   25   |   21-  30 | 8*           | 4.4.3*       | 5.6          | {6.6.2.3.4   | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 5.6.3.8      | 4.4.3        | 6.4.6.8.7    | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              | {6.6.5*      |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   26   |   31-  40 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 4.5          | 6.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 5.8          | 4.3          | 5.3.8.7      | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   27   |   41-  50 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 6            | 5            | 6.8.6.8.7    | 3.3.3.2      | 5.4          | {6.5.4.3     | 4.3          | 5.4.8.7      | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.1.5.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   28   |   51-  60 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 7.6          | 5            | 5.6.7        | 3.3.3.2      | 4            | {5.4.3       | 4.3          | {5.4.3.3.4.5 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {3.6.8       |              | {6.4.3.5.7   |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   29   |   61-  70 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.6.5        | 7            | 3.3.3.2      | 5.4          | 7.6.4.7.6.8  | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   31   |   71-  80 | 8            | 4.4.4.3      | 6            | 6.5          | 6.8.7        | 3.2          | 5.4          | {6.7.6.4.3   | 4.3          | 6.7          | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
  June  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.6.3.7.8   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.8.6.5.4   |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    1   |   81-  90 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | {6.5.6.5.8   | 3.1.3.2      | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.4.6.4.7   |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |   91- 100 | 9.7.8        | 4.2.4.3      | 7.5.6        | 5            | 6.8.7        | 3.3.1.2      | 5.3.4        | 8            | 4.3          | 6.8.7        | 2 | 8 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
    2   |  101- 110 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 6.8.6.5.7    | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  111- 120 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.3.5.7.6    | {6.2.3.6.4   | 7            | 3.2          | {5.2.3.5.3.2 | 9.6.4.7.8    | {4.1.2       | 6.8.7        | 2 | 8 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              | {3.6.2.5     |              |              | {3.5.2.3.4   |              | {4.2.3       |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.8.6.3     |   |   |   |   |
    3   |  121- 130 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 3.2          | {5.3.2.3     | 8            | 4.2.3        | {5.4.5.8.8   | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.2.5.4     |              |              | {6.3.8.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  131- 140 | 8            | 4.3          | 5.7.3.2.6    | 4.5          | 5.7          | 1.3.2        | 5.3.4        | 6.7.8        | 4.2.1.3      | 7            | 2 | 8 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    4   |  141- 150 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 2            | {5.3.2.3     | 6.8          | 4.1.3        | 5.6.7        | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.5.4       |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  151- 160 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 5.6.7.8      | 4.3          | 5.6.8.7      | 5 | 5 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
    5   |  161- 170 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 6.8.7        | 3.2          | 5.3.2.3.5.4  | 8            | 4.3          | 6.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  171- 176 | 8            | 2.4.3        | 7.6          | 6.5*         | 8.7          | 3.2*         |              |              |              |              | 1 | 5 | 3 |13 | 1: 4.33
    7   |  177- 180 |              |              |              |              |              |              | 5.4          | 8            | 4.4.3        | 8.7          | 1 | 3 |   |   |
    "   |  181- 190 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.3.2.5.4    | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 5 | 9 | 1: 1.80
    8   |  191- 200 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  201- 210 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.4.6.5      | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
    9   |  211- 220 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.6.7        | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  221- 230 | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.8        | 4.3          | 7            | 1 | 9 | 3 |17 | 1: 5.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   10   |  231- 240 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | {3.2.3.2.4.3 | 4.3          | 7            | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.5.4.7.8   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   11   |  241- 250 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.6.5        | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              12   |  251- 260 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | {7.6.7.7     | 3            | 3.7*         | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.9.8*      |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              14   |  261- 270 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | {5.3.4.3     | 3            | {3.3.3.3.4   | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {9.8*        |              | {4.6.4.7*    |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              15   |  271- 280 | 7.9.8        | 4.2.3        | 3.4.3.7.6    | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 1 | 9 |   |   |
    "   |  281- 290 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |                   |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.3.2.3     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   16   |  291- 300 | 7.8          | {4.4.4       | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | {6.5.4.3     | 4.3          | 6.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              | {4.4.3       |              |              |              |              |              | {5.6.7.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               "   |  301- 310 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.3.2        | 5.5.4        | {7.6.5.4.6   | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.7.9.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              17   |  311- 320 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.6.5        | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.7.6.7.8  | 4.3          | 7            | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  321- 330 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 6.7          | 2 | 8 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
   18   |  331- 340 | 7.7.8        | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  341- 350 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.6.5        | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
   19   |  351- 360 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 6.5.6.5.7    | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  361- 370 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.4.3.6.5    | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
   21   |  371- 380 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  381- 390 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
   22   |  391- 400 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 6.5.4.6.7    | 3.3.3.2      | 5.4          | 6.7.8        | 4.4.3        | 7            | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  401- 410 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 2            | 5.4          | 6.7.7.8      | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              23   |  411- 420 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | {7.6.7.6     | 4.3          | 7            | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.7.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              24   |  421- 430 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   |  431- 440 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 5 | 5 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
   25   |  441- 450 | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 7.6          | 6.5          | 6.5.7        | 3.3.2        | 5.5.4        | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
   26   |  451- 460 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  461- 470 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
   28   |  471- 480 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 9.8          | 3            | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
   29   |  481- 490 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.7.6        | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
   30   |  491- 500 | 7.9.8        | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  501- 510 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.4.3        | 8.7          | 2 | 8 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
  July  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    1   |  511- 520 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               2   |  521- 530 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | {7.6.5.6.5   | 4.4.3        | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.5.6.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               "   |  531- 540 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
    3   |  541- 550 | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 5.5.7        | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  551- 560 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
    5   |  561- 570 | 7.7.8        | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  571- 580 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |                   |           |              |              |              |              | {6.5.4.6.5   |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    6   |  581- 590 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.6.5        | {5.4.5.4.4   | 2            | 3.4          | 6.5.4.3.7.8  | 3            | 7            | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.5.6.5.8.7 |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               7   |  591- 600 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 8.7          | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  601- 610 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 1 | 9 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
    8   |  611- 620 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  621- 630 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 9.8          | 4.3          | 8.7          | 1 | 9 |   |   |
    "   |  631- 640 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 7.7.6        | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 4            | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 6 |24 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               9   |  641- 650 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.2          | {3.2.5.3     | 7.6.5.4.8    | 3            | 8.7          | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.5.4       |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |                   |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.5.4.3.7   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   10   |  651- 660 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | {6.5.4.7.6   | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.4.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              10   |  661- 670 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 6 | 4 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
   12   |  671- 680 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 6.5.4.7.8    | 4.3          | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              13   |  681- 690 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | {6.5.4       | 3.2          | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | {6.5.4.5     | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.5.7       |              |              |              |              | {6.5.8.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               "   |  691- 700 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |12 | 8 | 1: 0.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              14   |  701- 710 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | {6.5.4.5     | 2            | 3.5.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {4.6.8.7     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  711- 720 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 6.5.4.8      | 3            | 6.5.7        | 7 | 3 |13 | 7 | 1: 0.54
   15   |  721- 730 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   |  731- 740 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
   16   |  741- 750 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   |  751- 760 | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 5 | 5 |12 | 8 | 1: 0.67
   17   |  761- 770 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4            | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   |  771- 780 | 8            | 2.2.3        | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
   19   |  781- 790 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 3.4          | 7.6.5.8      | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   |  791- 800 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 6.5.6.7      | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   |  801- 810 | 8            | 2.3          | 6            | 5            | 6.5.7        | 2            | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |20 |10 | 1: 0.50
   20   |  811- 820 | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | 8            | 2.2.3        | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   |  821- 830 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | 8            | 2.3          | 8.7          | 6 | 4 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
   21   |  831- 840 | 8            | 3            | 5.4.5.6      | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 8.7          | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   |  841- 850 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 3.2.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |14 | 6 | 1: 0.43
   22   |  851- 860 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 3.5.4        | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   |  861- 870 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 4            | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  871- 880 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |11 |19 | 1: 1.73
   23   |  881- 890 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  891- 900 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 5 | 5 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
   24   |  901- 910 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  911- 920 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
   26   |  921- 930 | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 2.2.3        | 8.7          | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  931- 940 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.5.4        | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
   27   |  941- 950 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1: 0.43
   28   |  951- 960 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 5.4.7        | 2            | 5.5.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
   29   |  961- 970 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 8.7          | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 | 8 | 2 | 1: 0.25
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              30   |  971- 980 | 8            | 3            | 4.3.2.6      | 5            | {6.5.4.6     | 2            | 5.5.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1: 0.43
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.5.7       |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |              31   |  981- 990 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 8.7          | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 | 8 | 2 | 1: 0.25
 August |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    2   |  991-1000 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 2            | {2.3.5.3     | 7.6.8        | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1: 0.43
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.3.3.4     |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               3   | 1001-1010 | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.6.5.6.7.8  | 3            | 5.4.3.4.3.7  | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   | 1011-1020 | 8            | 2.3          | 5.6          | 3.2.3.6.5    | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 9.8          | 2.1.3        | 7            | 4 | 6 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               4   | 1021-1030 | 7.8          | 3            | 5.4.3.7.6    | 6.5          | {6.5.6       | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | {2.2.4.2     | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.6.7       |              |              |              | {4.2.3       |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               "   | 1031-1040 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 6.4.3.6.5    | 7            | 2            | 3.5.4        | 8            | 2.3          | 8.7          | 5 | 5 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               5   | 1041-1050 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 2.3.2.6.5    | 8.7          | 2            | 4            | 8            | 2.2.4.3      | {8.8.6.8.4   | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.5.8.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               6   | 1051-1060 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 4.2.6.5      | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               7   | 1061-1070 | 8            | 3            | 5.4.3.6      | 4.5          | {6.5.6.5     | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1: 0.43
        |           |              |              |              |              | {4.8.7       |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |               9   | 1071-1080 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 7            |10 | 0 |10 | 0 | 1: 0.00
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |  1.2.3.4.5   |              |              |              |              |              |   1.2.3.4    |   2.3.4.5    |   |   |   |   |
        |           |   5.6.7.8    |  2.3.4.5.6   |   6.7.8.9    |    5.6.7     |    1.2.3.4   |    4.5.6     |   2.3.4.5    |    1.2.3     |    5.6.7     |   6.7.8.9    |   |   |   |   |
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
   10   |    1-  10 | 6.5.7        | 3.2.6.5      | 8            | 6            | 2.4.3        | 5            | 5.4          | 2            | 7.5.2.7.6    | 8            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
   11   |   11-  20 | 7            | 3.6.5        | 8            | 6            | 3            | 6.5          | 4            | 3.2          | 7.6          | 8            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |                   |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {3.2.3.5.3   |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   12   |   21-  30 | 7            | 2.2.6.5      | 7.8          | 6            | 3            | 5            | {2.5.3.2     | 2            | 6            | 8            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1: 0.43
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.3.2.5     |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.5.5.4     |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========

[Footnote 1: First choices correct by reason of aid from the experimenter
are not counted as correct (R) in the summary.]

[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]


The method of choosing the first box at the right end and then the one
next to it developed in the case of all except two of the ten settings.
The time of appearance is worth noting. In setting 1, it failed to
appear; in setting 2, it developed early,--after about one hundred
trials; in setting 3, after about one hundred and fifty trials; in
setting 4, after about one hundred and fifty trials; in setting 5, after
about one hundred and seventy trials; in setting 6, after about one
hundred trials; in setting 7, after about fifty trials; in setting 8, it
never developed; in setting 9, after about fifty trials; and in setting
10, it developed very late,--after about four hundred and seventy
trials.

This method of reaction, although inadequate, proved remarkably
persistent, and it is doubtful whether it had been wholly overcome at
the conclusion of the experiment. In the case of the series of trials
given on June 8, numbered 191 to 200, the method used was either that of
the first at the right and then the next, or direct choice of the right
box.

Throughout the trials with this problem, the end boxes, numbers 1 and 9,
were avoided. This is at least partially explained by the fact that they
never existed, and obviously never could appear, in problem 2, as right
boxes. In trials 601 to 610, given on July 7, there occurred partial
return to the formerly established method of choosing the first door at
the right. This relapse was characteristic of what happened during the
many days which intervened between the definite appearance of this habit
and the final solution of the problem.

Especially in connection with such relapses, Skirrl showed extreme
fatigue or ennui and often would refuse to work and simply sit before
the open doors yawning. This happened even when he was extremely hungry
and evidently eager enough for food.

From July 12 on the hunger motive was increased by feeding the monkey
only in the apparatus and by so regulating the amount of food given in
each trial that he should obtain barely enough to keep him in good
physical condition. An increase in the number of correct choices
promptly resulted, and continued until on July 14 the ratio of choices
was 1 to .54. It appeared from these data that a relatively small number
of choices, say not more than ten a day, the rewards in connection with
which supplied the only food received by the animal, yielded most
favorable results.

On July 16, the period of confinement in wrong boxes was increased to
sixty seconds, and it was so continued for a number of days. But in the
end, it became clear that the period of thirty seconds, combined with a
liberal reward in the shape of desired food and a single series of ten
trials per day, was most satisfactory. The detailed data of table 2
indicate that at this time Skirrl was making his choices by memory of
the particular setting.

Skirrl, on July 17 was evidently hungry and eager to locate food, but
seemingly unable to select the right box. In trial 5 (765th) of the
series, he was punished by confinement in box 8. When the doors were
unlocked in order that the entrance door might be raised to release him,
the lock-bar, sliding under the floor, made a slight grating noise, and
the instant the entrance door was opened, he jumped out excitedly. _He
made no outcry, but as soon as he was out of the box, sat down, and
taking up his right hind foot, examined it for a few seconds._ Having
apparently assured himself that nothing serious had happened, he went on
unconcernedly about his task. The presumption is that the sound of the
lock-bar, associated as it was with his painful experience in box 1,
revived the strongly affective experience of stepping on the nail.
Psychologically described, the sound induced an imaginal complex
equivalent to the earlier painful experience. The behavior seems to the
writer a most important bit of evidence of imagery in the monkey.
Finally, on August 9, after ten hundred and seventy trials, Skirrl
succeeded in choosing correctly in the ten trials of a series, and he
was therefore considered to have solved the problem of the second door
from the right end of the group.

On the following day, he was given a control series with the settings
which are presented on page 19 and also at the bottom of table 2. In
this series he chose correctly five times,--in other words, as often
correctly as incorrectly. An analysis of the choices indicates, however,
that two of the five correct choices were made in box 8, which, as it
happened, had proved a peculiarly easy one for him throughout the
training, since from the first he tended to avoid door 9. Consequently,
it is only fair to conclude, from the results for this control series
and for those given on August 11 and 12, that the animal chose not on
the basis of anything remotely resembling a general idea of secondness
from the right end, but instead on the basis of gradually acquired modes
of reaction to the particular settings. This conclusion is strengthened
by the fact that he had failed to learn to react appropriately and
readily to most of the settings of the regular series.

The curve which represents the course of the learning process in this
problem is presented in figure 19. For this and all other curves which
involve more than a single series of observations a day, the method of
construction was as follows: The first series for each day of training
is indicated on the curve by a dot, while the second or third series on
a given day, although space is allowed for them, are not so indicated.
Consequently, the form of the curve is determined chiefly by the first
series per day. The extreme irregularities of this curve are most
interesting and puzzling, as are also the variations in the daily ratios
of right to wrong first choices. Three times in the course of the
training, this ratio rose to 1 to 9, or higher. The causes for such
extreme variations are not easily enumerated, but a few of the most
obvious contributory causes are variations in the weather, especially
cloudiness or fogginess, which rendered the apparatus dark; variations
in the degree of hunger or eagerness for food; differences in the
activities of the animals in the cages outside of the laboratory
(sometimes they were noisy and distracted the subject), and finally,
differences in the physical fitness and attitude of the animal from day
to day.

The more or less incidental behavior in connection with this experiment
more strongly than the statistical results of the work on problem 2
indicate the existence of imagery. That ideas played a part in the
solution of the problem is probable, but at best they functioned very
ineffectively. The small number of methods used in the selection of the
right box, and the slight variations from the chief method, that of
choosing the first box at the right end and then the one next to it,
apparently justify Doctor Hamilton's characterization of this monkey as
defective.


[Illustration: FIGURE 19.--Error curves of learning for the solution of
problem 2 (second box from right end).]


_Problem 3. Alternately First at Left and First at Right_

Following the control series given in connection with problem 1, an
interval of rest lasting from August 12 to August 19 was allowed in
order that Skirrl might in part at least lose the effects of his
training and regain his customary interest in the apparatus by being
allowed to obtain food easily instead of by dint of hard labor,--labor
which was harder by far, apparently, than physical activity because it
demanded of the animal certain mental processes which were either
lacking or but imperfectly functional. The difficultness of the daily
tasks appears to be reliably indicated by the tendency to yawn.

Systematic work on problem 3, which has been defined as alternately the
first door at the left and the first door at the right of the group, was
begun August 19, and for nine days a single series of ten trials per day
was given. Work then had to cease because of the experimenter's return
to Cambridge.

The results of the work on this problem demand but brief analysis and
comment. The expected ratio of one right to four wrong choices per
series appears (see table 3) for the first series of trials, and _this
in spite of the fact that Skirrl had been trained for several weeks to
choose the second door from the right end_. One would ordinarily have
predicted a much larger number of incorrect choices. The right choices
were due to the monkey's strong tendency to go first to the first door
at the right and thence to the one next to it. Indeed in the series
given on August 24; this method was followed without variation. In other
words, in every one of the ten trials Skirrl entered first the box at
the extreme right end of the group. This necessarily resulted in as many
right as wrong first choices. Consequently, the ratio reads 1 to 1. But
the method was not adhered to, and at no time either before or after
that date did he succeed in equalling this achievement. There was, as a
matter of fact, no steady improvement, and so far as one may judge from
the records which were obtained, the course of events in the solution of
this problem would have been similar to those in problem 2.



TABLE 3

Results for Skirrl, _P. irus_, in Problem 3


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
 Date   |  No. of   |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     | R | W | R | W |Ratio of
        |  trials   |    5.6.7     |    5.6.7     |  1.2.3.4.5.6 |  1.2.3.4.5.6 |   4.5.6.7.8  |   4.5.6.7.8  |   2.3.4.5    |   2.3.4.5    | 3.4.5.6.7.8.9| 3.4.5.6.7.8.9|   |   |   |   |R to W
________|___________|______________|______________|______________|______________|______________|______________|______________|______________|______________|______________|___|___|___|___|________
August  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |  {6.5.4.6    |              |              |              |              |              |              |  {8.7.6.5    |   |   |   |   |
  19    |  1- 10    |     7.5      |     6.7      |  {3.2.6.4    |   5.3.6      |  {7.8.7.6    |      8       | 4.3.5.4.5.2  |      5       | 9.8.7.6.4.3  |  {4.5.8.7    | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
        |           |              |              |  {3.6.1*     |              |  {8.6.4      |              |              |              |              |  {6.5.9*     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |  {5.4.6.5    |              |  {8.7.6.7    |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  20    |  11- 20   |    7.6.5     |  {6.5.6.5    |  {4.6.5.3    |  5.3.2.4.6   |  {7.5.8.8    |      8       |  5.4.3.2     |     4.5      | 8.7.6.5.4.3  |  {8.7.6.8.3  | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1:9.00
        |           |              |  {7          |  {2.5.1*     |              |  {7.6.4*     |              |              |              |              |  {7.6.4.3.9  |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |  {6.2.5.6    |              |              |              |  {5.3.5.4    |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  21    |  21- 30   |  7.6.7.6.5   |      7       |  {5.3.6.5    |  2.5.5.6     |  8.6.5.4     |      8       |  {3.5.3.5    |      5       |  {9.8.7.6    |     8.9      | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
        |           |              |              |  {4.3.1*     |              |              |              |  {4.3.2*     |              |  {5.4.3      |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  23    |  31- 40   |    7.6.5     |    6.5.7     |  {6.4.3.2    |    3.2.6     |  8.7.6.4     |      8       |  5.4.5.3.2   |     5.2      |    8.7.3     |      9       | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
        |           |              |              |  {5.6.2.1    |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  24    |  41- 50   |    7.6.5     |      7       |  {6.2.5      |      6       |  {8.7.8.7    |      8       |    5.3.2     |      5       |  {9.8.7.6    |      9       | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
        |           |              |              |  {4.3.1      |              |  {5.7.5.4    |              |              |              |  {5.4.3      |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  {8.7.3.6    |   |   |   |   |
  25    |  51- 60   |    7.6.5     |    6.5.7     |    5.2.1     |      6       |    8.5.4     |      8       |      2       |     2.5      |  9.8.7.4.3   |  {8.7.5.3    | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  {8.7.9*     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  26    |  61- 70   |    7.6.5     |    6.5.7     |      1       |    2.1.6     |   8.7.6.4    |      8       |      2       |    3.2.5     |  9.8.7.5.3   |  {3.6.8.3    | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  {4.7.9      |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  {8.6.3.3    |   |   |   |   |
  27    |  71- 80   |    7.6.5     |      7       |     2.1      |    1.5.6     |   8.7.6.4    |      8       |      2       |      5       |  9.8.7.6.3   |  {7.5.3.8    | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1:1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  {3.6.9*     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  28    |  81- 90   |   7.6.7.5    |      7       |     3.1      |      6       |    8.6.4     |     4.8      |      2       |    2.4.5     |   8.7.4.3    |    3.8.9     | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========

[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]






2. Sobke, _Pithecus rhesus_


_Problem 1. First at the Left End_

Sobke was somewhat afraid of the experimenter when the investigation was
undertaken, and instead of willingly coming out of his cage when the
door was raised, he often had to be coaxed out and lured into the
apparatus with food. Whereas Skirrl was frank and rather aggressive,
Sobke was stealthy in his movements, furtive, and evidently suspicious
of the experimenter as well as of the apparatus. He was perfectly safe
to approach, but would not permit anyone to touch him. After a few days,
he began to take food from the hands of the experimenter.

Preliminary work to acquaint this monkey with the routine of the
experiment was begun on April 13. As in the case of Skirrl, he was lured
into the apparatus and was taught the route through the boxes to the
starting point by being allowed to obtain food once each day in each of
the nine boxes. The procedure was simple. The entrance door and the exit
door of a particular box were raised and the animal admitted to the
reaction-compartment and permitted to pass through the box whose doors
stood open, take its food, and return to the starting point. Sobke very
quickly learned the route perfectly and came to work steadily and
rapidly. After five days of preliminary work of this sort, he was so
thoroughly accustomed to the apparatus that it was evidently desirable
to begin with regular training experiments.

The first series of trials was given on April 19. Both punishment and
reward were employed from the first. The punishment consisted of
confinement for thirty seconds in each wrong box, and the reward of a
small piece of banana, usually not more than a tenth of a medium sized
banana for each correct choice. The total time for the first series of
trials was fourteen minutes. This indicates that Sobke worked rapidly.
My notes record that he worked quickly though shyly, wasted almost no
time, made few errors of choice, and waited quietly during confinement
in the boxes. In this, also, he differed radically from Skirrl who was
restless and always tried to escape from confinement.

Throughout the work on problem 1, punishment and reward were kept
constant. Everything progressed smoothly; there were no such
irregularities of behavior as appeared in the case of Skirrl, and
consequently the description of results is a relatively simple matter.
Sobke invariably chose the end boxes. His performance was in every way
superior to that of Skirrl.

As previously, the detailed results are presented in tabular form (table
4). From this table it appears that, whereas the expected ratio of right
to wrong first choices for this problem is 1 to 2.5, the actual ratio
for Sobke's first series was 1 to .67. This surprisingly good showing is
unquestionably due to his marked tendency to choose the end box of a
group; and this tendency, in turn, may in part be the result of the
preliminary training, for during that only one box was open each time.
But, if the preliminary training were responsible for Sobke's tendency,
it should be noted that it had very different effect upon Skirrl, and,
as will be seen later, upon Julius.

The results for the ten different settings of the doors for problem 1 as
they appear in table 4 are of interest for a number of reasons. In the
first place, the setting 1. 2. 3 appearing twice,--at the beginning of
the series and again at the end--yielded markedly different results in
the two positions. For whereas no mistakes were made in the case of
setting 1, there were fifty per cent of incorrect first choices for
setting 10. Again, satisfactory explanation is impossible. It is
conceivable that fatigue or approaching satiety may have had something
to do with the failures at the end of the series, but as a rule, as is
indicated by settings 1, 2, and 6, if correct choices were made at the
beginning, they continued throughout the day's work.

In this problem, Sobke's improvement was steady and fairly rapid, and in
the eighth series, trials 71 to 80, only correct first choices appear.
Consequently, seventy trials were required for the solution of the
problem. This number is in marked contrast with Skirrl's one hundred and
thirty-two trials.

Immediately following the first perfect series, Sobke was given two
series of control tests on April 28. Conditions were unfavorable, since
the day was stormy and the rain pattering on the sheet-iron roof made a
great din. Nevertheless, he worked steadily and well up to the sixth
trial, which was preceded by a slight delay because of the necessity of
refilling some of the food boxes. After this interruption, wrong choices
occurred in trial 6. And again after trial 9, there was brief
interruption, followed by wrong choices in trial 10. The ratio of right
to wrong choices for this first control series was therefore 1 to .25.



TABLE 4

Results for Sobke, _P. rhesus_, in Problem 1


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |    1.2.3     |     8.9      |  3.4.5.6.7   |     7.8.9    |  2.3.4.5.6   |     6.7.8    |     5.6.7    |  4.5.6.7.8   |     7.8.9    |     1.2.3    |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
 April  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   19   |    1-10   | 1            | 8            | 3            | 9.7          | 6.2          | 6            | 7.5          | 4            | 9.7          | 1            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   20   |   11-20   | 1            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 2            | 6            | 7.5          | 8.4          | 9.9.7        | 1            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1:0.43
   21   |   21-30   | 1            | 8            | 4.3          | 9.7          | 2            | 6            | 5            | 8.4          | 7            | 1            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1:0.43
   22   |   31-40   | 1            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6.2          | 6            | 6.5          | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1:0.43
   23   |   41-50   | 1            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 2            | 6            | 5            | 4            | 9.7          | 3.1          | 8 | 2 | 8 | 2 | 1:0.25
   24   |   51-60   | 1            | 8            | 3            | 9.7          | 2            | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 2.1          | 8 | 2 | 8 | 2 | 1:0.25
   26   |   61-70   | 1            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 2            | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1 | 1:0.11
   27   |   71-80   | 1            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 2            | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 1            |10 | 0 |10 | 0 | 1:0.00
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |     2.3.4    |              |              |  1.2.3.4.5   |   |   |   |   |
        |           |    2.3.4     |  6.7.8.9     |    3.4.5     | 4.5.6.7.8.9  |   6.7.8.9    |  1.2.3.4.5   |   5.6.7.8    | 3.4.5.6.7.8  |    5.6.7     |   6.7.8.9    |   |   |   |   |
        |           +--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+   |   |   |   |
   28   |    1-10   | 2            | 6            | 3            | 4            | 6            | 5.4.1        | 2            | 3            | 5            | 5.4.2.1      | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   |   11-20   | 2            | 6            | 3            | 4            | 6            | 2.1          | 2            | 3            | 5            | 1            | 9 | 1 |17 | 3 | 1:0.18
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========



Six minutes after completion of the first control series, a second was
given under slightly more favorable conditions, and in this only a
single wrong choice occurred, in that box 2 was first chosen in trial 6
instead of box 1. From the results of these two control series, it is
evident that Sobke's solution of problem 1 is reasonably adequate. He is
easily diverted or disturbed in his work by any unusual circumstances,
but so long as everything goes smoothly, he chooses with ease and
certainty. Whether it is fair to describe the behavior as involving an
idea of the relation of the right box to the other members of the group
would be difficult to decide. I hesitate to infer definite ideation from
the available evidence, but I strongly suspect the presence of images
and relatively ineffective or inadequate ideation.

It is perfectly evident that Sobke is much more intelligent than Skirrl.
In practically every respect, he adapted himself more quickly to the
experimental procedure and progressed more steadily toward the solution
of the problem than did Skirrl. The contrast in the learning processes
of the two monkeys could scarcely be better exhibited than by the curves
of learning which are presented in figure 18. The first, that for Sobke,
is surprisingly regular; the second, that for Skirrl, is quite as
surprisingly irregular. These results correlate perfectly with the
steadiness and predictability of the former's responses and the
irregularity and erraticness of the latter's.


_Problem 2. Second from the Right End_

On the completion of problem 1 Sobke was in perfect condition, as to
health and training, for experimental work. He had come to work quietly,
fairly deliberately, and very steadily. His timidity had diminished and
he would readily come to the experimenter for food, although still he
was somewhat distrustful at times and became timid when anything unusual
occurred in the apparatus.

As preparation for problem 2, a break in regular experimentation
covering four days followed the control series of problem 1. On each of
these four days the monkey was allowed to get food once from each of the
nine boxes, both doors of a given box being open for the trial and all
other doors closed. For this feeding experiment, the doors were opened
in irregular order, and this order was changed from day to day.

Systematic work with problem 2 began on May 3, with punishment of thirty
seconds for mistakes and a liberal reward of food for each success.
Early in the series of trials it was discovered that Sobke was likely to
become discouraged and waste a great deal of time unless certain aid
were given by the experimenter. On this account, after the first two
trials, the method was adopted of punishing the animal by confinement
for the first ten mistakes in a trial, and of then, if need be,
indicating the right box by slightly and momentarily raising the exit
door. Every trial in which aid was thus given by the experimenter is
indicated in table 5 by an asterisk following the last choice. In the
first series of trials for this problem, aid had to be given in seven of
the ten trials, and even so the series occupied seventy-one minutes. It
is possible that had no aid been given, the work might have been
continued successfully with a smaller number of trials than ten per day.
But under the circumstances it seemed wiser to avoid the risk of
discouraging and thus spoiling the animal for use in the experiment. It
should be stated, also, that it proved impossible to adhere to the
period of thirty seconds as punishment in this series. For the majority
of the wrong choices confinement of not more than ten seconds was used.

For the second series, given on May 4, the conditions were unfavorable
in that it was dark and rainy, and the noise of the rain on the roof
frightened Sobke. He refused to work after the fourth trial, and the
series had to be completed on the following day. The total time required
for this series was seventy-eight minutes.

The work on May 6 was distinctly better, and the animal's behavior
indicated, in a number of trials, definite recognition of the right
door. He might, for example, make a number of incorrect choices, then
pause for a few seconds to look steadily at the doors, and having
apparently found some cue, run directly to the right box. No aid from
the experimenter was needed in this series.

On the following day improvement continued and the animal's method of
choosing became definite and fairly precise. He was deliberate, quiet,
and extremely business-like. The time for the series was thirty-one
minutes.

The period of punishment was increased on May 12 to thirty seconds.
Previously, for the greater number of the trials, it had been ten to
fifteen seconds. This increase apparently did not disturb the monkey,
for he continued to work perfectly throughout the series, although
making many mistakes in spite of deliberate choices and the refusal of
certain boxes in each trial.

An interesting and significant incident occurred on May 13 when at the
conclusion of trial 5, Doctor Hamilton came into the experiment room for
a few minutes. Sobke immediately stopped working, and he could not be
induced to make any choices until Doctor Hamilton had left the room.
This well indicates his sensitiveness to his surroundings, and his
inclination to timidity or nervousness even in the presence of
conditions not in themselves startling.

Work was continued thus steadily until May 28 when, because of the
failure of the animal to improve, it seemed wise to increase the period
of confinement as punishment to sixty seconds. In the meantime, it had
sometimes been evident that Sobke was near to the solution of his
problem. He would often make correct choices in three or four trials in
succession and then apparently lose his cue and fail utterly for a
number of trials.

After June 1, in order to hasten the solution of the problem, two series
per day were given. In some instances the second series was given almost
immediately after the first, while in others an interval of an hour or
more intervened. It was further found desirable to give Sobke all of his
food in the apparatus. When the rewards obtained in the several trials
did not satisfy his hunger, additional food was presented, on the
completion of the series of experiments, in one or more of the food
cups. On days marked by unwillingness or refusal to work, very little
food was given. Thus, the eagerness of the monkey to locate the right
box was increased and, as a matter of observation, his deliberateness
and care in choice increased correspondingly. Sixty seconds punishment
was found satisfactory, and it was therefore continued throughout the
work on this problem.

It was evident, on June 9, from the behavior of the monkey as well as
from the score, that the perfect solution of the problem was near at
hand. This fact the experimenter recorded in his daily notes, and sure
enough, on the following day Sobke chose correctly throughout the series
of ten trials. The time for this series was only ten minutes. The
choices were made deliberately and readily.

An analysis of the data of table 5 reveals five methods or reactive
tendencies which appeared more or less definitely in the following
order: (a) Choice of first box at the left, because of experience in
problem 1. This tendency was very quickly suppressed by the requirements
in connection with problem 2. Indeed one of the most significant
differences which I have discovered between the behavior of the primates
and that of other mammals is the time required for the suppression of
such an acquired tendency. The monkey seems to learn almost immediately
that it is not worth while to persist in a tendency which although
previously profitable no longer yields satisfaction, whereas in the
crow, pig, rat, and ring dove, the unprofitable mode of response tends
to persist during a relatively large number of trials. (b) The tendency
to choose, first, a box near the left end of the group, to go from that
to the box at the extreme right end of the group, thence to the one next
in order, which was, of course, the right box. This tendency appears
fairly clearly from May 7th on. (c) The box at the extreme right was
first chosen and then the one next to it. For example, in setting 2, box
4 would be chosen first, then box 3. Or, if this did not occur, the
method previously described under (b) was likely to be employed, as for
example, in setting 8, where such choices as 7.6.5.1.8 appear. (d) In
certain series there appeared a marked preference for a particular box,
usually box 3 (see results for May 24). This was doubtless due in a
measure, if not wholly, to the fact that box 3 was the right box twice
in each series of ten settings. But it should be added that the same is
true of box 7, for which no preference was manifested at any time. (e)
Direct choice of the right box.

The five reactive methods or tendencies enumerated above roughly
appeared in the order named, but there were certain irregularities and
the order as well as the time of appearance varied somewhat from setting
to setting. In general, method c was the most frequently used prior to
the development of method e, the direct choice of the right box.



TABLE 5

Results for Sobke, _P. rhesus_, in Problem 2


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  1.2.3.4.5   |              |              | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |    7.8.9     |   1.2.3.4    | 2.3.4.5.6.7  | 1.2.3.4.5.6  |  4.5.6.7.8   |     1.2.3    |   2.3.4.5    |   6.7.8.9    |   1.2.3.4    | 3.4.5.6.7.8  |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   May  |           | {7.7.9.7.7   | {1.2.4.1     | {3.2.7.2     | {4.6.1.6     |              | {3.1.3.3     |              |              | {4.1.4.1     | {3.8.3.3     |   |   |   |   |
    3   |    1-10   | {9.7.9.7.9   | {1.4.1.1     | {7.7.7.5     | {1.6.1.1     | 5.8.6.7      | {3.3.1.1     | 3.5.4        | 9.1.8        | {4.1.4.2     | {3.8.6.3     | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           | {7.9.9.7.8*  | {4.3*        | {2.7.6*      | {1.3.5*      |              | {1.1.2*      |              |              | {1.4.3*      | {8.3.7*      |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {4.7.2.7     |              | (8.8.4.8     |              | {5.5.5.5     | {9.5.5.9     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
4 and 5 |   11-20   | (7.9.7.9.9   | 1.4.1.3      | {2.7.3.2     | 1.6.5        | {8.8.4.8     | {3.3.1.1.3   | {5.5.5.3     | {7.1.6.6     | {4.4.4.4     | {8.8.6.8     | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           | {9.7.7.9.8   |              | {7.2.6*      |              | {4.8.7*      | {3.3.1.2     | {5.5.4*      | {6.5.8*      | {4.4.4.3     | {8.7         |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    6   |   21-30   | 9.7.9.7.8    | 4.3          | 7.2.3.7.6    | {6.3.1.6     | 6.8.7        | 3.1.2        | {5.3.5.3     | {6.9.4.6.1   | {4.1.2.4     | {3.4.5.3     | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           |              |              |              | {6.2.6.5     |              |              | {2.4         | {7.9.7.8     | {4.2.3       | {8.6.7       |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    7   |   31-40   | 7.9.7.8      | 1.4.3        | 2.7.6        | 3.5          | 4.8.7        | 3.1.2        | 3.2.3.5.4    | 8            | 4.3          | 5.8.3.4.8.7  | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
    8   |   41-50   | 7.9.7.8      | (4.2.4.1.4   | 6            | 5            | 6.5.4.8.7    | {3.1.3.1     | 5.3.5.4      | {7.4.2.1     | {4.2.4.1     | 5.3.8.7      | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              | {4.2.2.4.3   |              |              |              | {3.1.3.2     |              | {9.8         | {4.3         |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.3.5.3     |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   10   |   51-60   | 7.7.8        | 3            | 7.3.2.7.6    | 6.4.6.5      | (6.4.8.5     | 3.1.3.2      | {2.5.3.5     | 5.9.8        | 4.2.4.3      | {6.5.4       | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              | {4.8.7       |              | {2.5.4       |              |              | {3.8.7       |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   11   |   61-70   | 7.9.7.8      | 1.4.3        | 4.3.2.7.6    | 6.5          | {5.4.8.6     | 3.2          | 5.4          | 6.5.2.3.1.8  | 3            | 6.5.3.8.7    | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.4.8.7     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   12   |   71-80   | 7.9.8        | 3            | 7.3.2.7.6    | 6.5          | 5.4.8.7      | 1.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 5.4.3.8.7    | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
   13   |   81-90   | 7.8          | 4.3          | 3.7.6        | 6.5          | 8.7          | 1.3.2        | 2.5.2.5.4    | 7.6.5.9.8    | 3            | 8.7          | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {1.2.1.2.2   |              |   |   |   |   |
   14   |   91-100  | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.5.4.7      | 1.3.2        | 5.4          | 9.8          | {1.4.2.2.1   | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.1.4.3     |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   15   |  101-110  | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 5.4.5.7      | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 2.1.3        | 8.8.7        | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   17   |  111-120  | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | {2.1.2.1.2   | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.5.1.8    | 3            | 8.7          | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              | {1.3.2.6.5   |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   18   |  121-130  | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.5.2.8    | 3            | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.3.2.5.3   |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.5.2.5.3   |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   19   |  131-140  | 8            | 3            | 3.2.6        | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | {5.5.2.5.5   | 7.6.9.8      | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {3.2.5.5.3   |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.5.5.4     |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   20   |  141-150  | 7.8          | 3            | 3.2.7.6      | 6.5          | 5.4.7        | 3.2          | 3.2.5.4      | 6.5.4.3.8    | 3            | 7            | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
   21   |  151-160  | 7.8          | 3            | 5.7.5.3.7.6  | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.3.5.2.5.4  | 7.6.5.9.8    | 3            | 6.4.3.8.7    | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   22   |  161-170  | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 3.2.6.5      | 7            | 3.2          | {5.2.5.3     | 7.6.5.8      | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.5.4       |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {3.1.3       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   24   |  171-180  | 8            | 3            | {3.2.7.5     | {3.6.4       | 8.7          | {1.3.3       | {3.5.4       | 8            | {4.4.2.1     | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              | {7.3.6       | {3.6.5       |              | {3.2         |              |              | {4.3         |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   25   |  181-190  | 7.9.7.9.8    | 3            | 3.7.6        | 5            | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 4.3.8        | 4.3          | 8.7          | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
   26   |  191-200  | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
   27   |  201-210  | 7.9.8        | 3            | 3.2.7.6      | 5            | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
   28   |  211-220  | 8            | 3            | 3.7.6        | 4.3.2.6.5    | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.5.9.8    | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
   29   |  221-230  | 7.8          | 3            | 5.4.3.7.6    | 6.5          | 7            | 2            | 3.2.5.4      | 7.6.5.8      | 3            | 3.8.7        | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
   31   |  231-240  | 7.7.8        | 3            | 3.7.6        | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 9.8          | 3            | 3.7          | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
  June  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    1   |  241-250  | 8            | 3            | 5.4.7.6      | 3.2.6.5      | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  251-260  | 7.9.8        | 3            | 3.7.6        | 5            | 6.5.4.8.7    | 3.2          | 4            | 5.4.3.8      | {4.2.1.4     | 7            | 4 | 6 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.4.4.3     |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    2   |  261-270  | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 3.2.6.5      | 7            | 3.2          | 3.4          | 8            | 3            | 6.5.3.8.7    | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   |  271-280  | 7.8          | 3            | 3.7.6        | 3.6.5        | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.5.4.3.8  | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
    3   |  281-290  | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 3.6.5        | 8.7          | 3.2          | 4            | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  291-300  | 9.8          | 3            | 3.6          | 4.3.6.5      | 8.7          | 2            | 3.5.4        | 7.6.5.9.8    | 3            | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
    4   |  301-310  | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 3.4.3.6.5    | 8.7          | 2            | 3.2.5.4      | 7.6.5.8      | 3            | 3.8.7        | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  311-320  | 8            | 3            | 5.4.7.6      | 3.2.6.5      | 7            | 2            | 3.2.5.4      | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
    5   |  321-330  | 8            | 3            | 6            | 4.6.5        | 7            | 2            | 3.5.4        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   |  331-340  | 8            | 3            | 7.4.7.6      | 3.2.4.6.5    | 7            | 3.2          | 3.5.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |13 | 7 | 1: 0.54
    7   |  341-350  | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 8.7          | 1.3.1.2      | 3.5.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   |  351-360  | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 8.7          | 2            | 3.5.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |13 | 7 | 1: 0.54
    8   |  361-370  | 7.8          | 3            | 4.7.6        | 3.5          | 8.7          | 2            | 3.4          | 9.8          | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |  371-380  | 8            | 3            | 7.6          | 3.4.4.3.5    | 8.7          | 3.2          | 3.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
    9   |  381-390  | 8            | 3            | 6            | 4.2.1.5      | 7            | 2            | 3.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   |  391-400  | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 3.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 9 | 1 |16 | 4 | 1: 0.25
   10   |  401-410  | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 7            |10 | 0 |10 | 0 | 1: 0.00
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |  1.2.3.4.5   |              |              |              |              |              |   1.2.3.4    |    2.3.4.5   |   |   |   |   |
        |           |    5.6.7.8   |  2.3.4.5.6   |   6.7.8.9    |    5.6.7     |    1.2.3.4   |     4.5.6    |    2.3.4.5   |     1.2.3    |    5.6.7     |    6.7.8.9   |   |   |   |   |
        |           +--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
   11   |    1-10   | 6.7          | 3.5          | 8            | 6            | 3            | 5            | 3.4          | 3.2          | 7.7.2.6      | 8            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
   12   |   11-20   | 7            | 3.6.6.2.5    | 8            | 6            | 3            | 4.5          | 4            | 2            | 7.6          | 8            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1: 0.43
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========

[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]



Examination of table 5 indicates that some of the settings proved very
easy for Sobke; others, extremely difficult. Consequently, the number of
methods which were tried and rejected for a given setting varies from
two to five. Setting 2 proved a fairly simple one, and after the
inhibition of the tendency to choose the first box at the left, the only
definite tendency to appear was that of choosing the first box at the
right, and then the one next to it. After one hundred and thirty trials,
this method suddenly gave place to direct choice of the right box, and
during the following twenty-eight series, no error occurred for this
setting. Setting 4, on the contrary, proved extremely difficult, and a
variety of methods is more or less definitely indicated by the records.

It is needless to lengthen the description by analyzing the data for
each setting, since the reader by carefully scanning the columns of data
in table 5 may observe for himself the various tendencies and their
mutual relations.

Sobke's curve of learning (figure 19) in problem 2, is extremely
irregular, as was that of Skirrl. Similar irregularities appear in the
daily ratios of right to wrong first choices presented in the last
column of table 5. Most of these irregularities were due, I have
discovered, to unfavorable external conditions. Thus, dark rainy days
and disturbing noises outside the laboratory were obviously conditions
of poor work.

On the day following the final and correct series for problem 2, a
control series was given. In this Sobke seemed greatly surprised by the
new situations which presented themselves. Repeatedly he exhibited
impulses to enter the box which would have been the correct one in the
regular series of settings. He frequently inhibited such impulses and
chose correctly, but at other times he reacted quickly and made
mistakes. It was evident from his behavior that he was not guided by
anything like a definite idea of the relation of the right box to the
other members of the group.

In a second control series given on the following day, June 12,
confusion appeared, but less markedly. For the first setting, a correct
choice was made with deliberation. For the second setting, box 3 was
immediately chosen, as should have been the case in the regular series
of settings. Sobke seemed confused when he emerged from this box and had
difficulty in locating the right one. Then followed direct correct
choices for settings 3, 4, and 5. For setting 6, there is recorded a
deliberately made wrong choice, and so on throughout the series, the
choices being characterized by deliberateness and definite search for
the right box. Uncertainty was plainly indicated, and in this the
behavior of the animal differed markedly from that in the concluding
series of the regular experiment.

It seems safe to conclude from the results of these control series that
Sobke has no free idea of the relation of secondness from the right and
is chiefly dependent upon memory of the particular settings for cues
which lead to correct choice.


_Problem 3. Alternately First at Left and First at Right_

For four successive days after the last control series in connection
with problem 2, Sobke was merely fed in the apparatus according to
previous description (p. 43). He exhibited a wonderfully keen appetite
and was well fed during this interval between problems.

The method of experimentation chosen for problem 3 in the light of
previous experience was that of confining the monkey for a short time,
ten to fifteen seconds, in the wrong box, in each of the first ten
mistakes for a given trial, and of then aiding him to find the right box
by the slight and momentary raising of the exit door. Aid proved
necessary in a few of the trials during the first four days. Then he
worked independently. As work progressed it was found possible and also
desirable to increase the period of confinement, and in the end, sixty
seconds proved satisfactory. It was also thought desirable to increase
the number of trials per day from a single series during the early days
to two or even three series from June 29 on. Often three series could be
given in succession without difficulty. During the early trials on this
problem Sobke worked remarkably well, but later his willingness
diminished, evidently because of his failure readily to solve the
problem, and it became extremely difficult to coax him into the
apparatus. On days when he entered only reluctantly and as it seemed
against his will, he was likely to be nervous, erratic, and often slow
in making his choices, but above all he tended to waste time by not
returning to the starting point, preferring rather to loiter in the
alleyways or run back and forth.



TABLE 6

Results for Sobke, _P. rhesus_, in Problem 3


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   3.4.5.6    |    3.4.5.6   | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |    5.6.7     |    5.6.7     | 1.2.3.4.5.6  | 1.2.3.4.5.6  |  4.5.6.7.8   |  4.5.6.7.8   |   2.3.4.5    |   2.3.4.5    |    7.8.9     |     7.8.9    |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  June  |           |              |              |              | {3.1.2.1     | {7.8.7.8     |              |              |              | {9.8.7.9     |              |   |   |   |   |
   17   |   1--10   | {6.6.7.6     | 5.7          | {4.4.3.5.4   | {4.4.2.1     | {8.8.7.8     | 8            | 2            | 3.2.5        | {8.7.6.9     | 3.8.9        | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
        |           | {6.5         |              | {5.4.2.1     | {5.4.6*      | {7.7.4*      |              |              |              | {8.7.3*      |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {3.4.2.5     |              | {8.7.7.5     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   18   |  11--20   | 6.6.6.5      | 5.7          | {4.5.6.4     | 3.1.4.3.6    | {8.8.7.8     | 8            | 3.2          | (3.4.2.4     | 9.8.8.7.3    | 8.6.9        | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1:9.00
        |           |              |              | {2.3.1*      |              | {7.8.4*      |              |              | {4.5         |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {3.6.5.4     |              | {8.8.7.7     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   19   |  21--30   | 6.5          | 7            | {2.5.2.6     | 3.6          | {7.8.8.8     | 8            | 4.3.2        | {3.2.4.2     | {9.8.7.9.7   | 9            | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
        |           |              |              | {3.5.1*      |              | {8.4         |              |              | {2.5         | {6.5.4.3     |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | (8.8.8.8     |              |              |              | {9.9.8.9     |              |   |   |   |   |
   21   |  31--40   | 6.5          | 5.6.5.7      | {3.5.4.6     | 2.5.3.6      | {7.8.3.8     | 8            | 4.2          | 2.5          | {9.5.9.9     | 9            | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
        |           |              |              | {4.3.5.1     |              | {8.7.4*      |              |              |              | {9.9.3*      |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   22   |  41--50   | 7.6.5        | 6.5.5.7      | 1            | 2.1.3.6      | {8.8.8.8     | 8            | 2            | 2.3.2.2.5    | {9.8.9.8.7   | 9            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1:1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              | {7.8.4       |              |              |              | {6.5.9.3     |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   23   |  51--60   | 5            | 6.5.7        | 1            | {1.2.1.1     | 8.5.4        | 8            | 5.4.2        | 2.4.2.5      | {9.8.4.9     | 9            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1:1.50
        |           |              |              |              | {3.2.6       |              |              |              |              | {7.3         |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   24   |  61--70   | 7.6.5        | 7            | 2.3.1        | 2.1.5.4.2.6  | 8.7.8.4      | 8            | 4.5.4.3.2    | 2.2.4.5      | 9.7.6.8.3    | 9            | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
   25   |  71--80   | 6.5          | 5.7          | 3.1          | 6            | 8.5.4        | 8            | 2            | 3.2.5        | 9.8.7.3      | 3.9          | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   26   |  81--90   | 7.7.6.5      | 6.5.7        | 3.1          | {1.4.1.1     | 8.4          | 8            | 5.4.2        | 2.5          | 9.8.9.6.3    | 9            | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
        |           |              |              |              | {5.1.6       |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   28   |  91--100  | 7.6.5        | 7            | 1            | 1.2.4.6      | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 3.2.2.2.5    | 9.8.8.7.9.3  | 9            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   29   | 101--110  | 7.6.5        | 5.7          | 1            | {1.1.5.3     | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 4.2.5        | {9.9.8.9.4   | 9            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {2.1.6       |              |              |              |              | {9.7.6.3     |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 111--120  | 6.5          | 6.5.7        | 1            | 2.1.1.3.6    | 8.5.4        | 8            | 2            | 3.2.5        | 9.8.7.6.4.3  | 9            | 4 | 6 | 8 |12 | 1:1.50
   30   | 121--130  | 5            | 6.5.6.5.5.7  | 1            | 3.1.6        | 8.7.6.8.5.4  | 8            | 2            | 4.2.4.2.5    | 9.3          | 9            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 131--140  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 2.3.6        | 8.5.6.4      | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.8.3        | 3.9          | 6 | 4 |11 | 9 | 1:0.82
  July  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    1   | 141--150  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 1.6          | 8.7.4        | 8            | 2            | 3.2.5        | 9.8.6.9.3    | 9            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   | 151--160  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 2.5.3.6      | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 2.5          | 9.3          | 8.8.7.5.4.9  | 5 | 5 |11 | 9 | 1:0.82
    2   | 161--170  | 6.5          | 7            | 1            | 2.6          | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 3.5          | 9.3          | 9            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
    3   | 171--180  | 6.5          | 7            | 1            | 1.5.6        | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 3.5          | 9.3          | 9            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 181--190  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 4.6          | 8.6.4        | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.8.4.8.5.3  | 9            | 7 | 3 |12 | 8 | 1:0.67
    5   | 191--200  | 6.5          | 5.7          | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.5.3        | 9            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   | 201--210  | 5            | 7            | 6.1          | 2.6          | 8.6.4        | 8            | 5.3.5.4.3.2  | 4.3.5        | 9.7.3        | 9            | 4 | 6 |10 |10 | 1:1.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    6   | 211--220  | 5            | 5.7          | 1            | 2.6          | 8.6.4        | 8            | 2            | 4.3.5        | 9.3          | {5.4.8.3     | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {8.5.4.9     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 221--230  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 5.3.6        | 8.6.8.4      | 8            | 4.2          | 3.2.5        | 9.3          | 9            | 5 | 5 | 9 |11 | 1:1.22
    7   | 231--240  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 2.6          | 8.4          | 7.4.8        | 2            | 4.3.5        | 8.3          | 9            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 241--250  | 5            | 7            | 2.6.3.5.1    | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.3          | 9            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {2.6.2.6.4   |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 251--260  | 5            | 7            | {6.3.2.6     | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.5.3        | 9            | 7 | 3 |19 |11 | 1:0.58
        |           |              |              | {5.4.3.1     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    8   | 261--270  | 7.5          | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 5.2          | 5            | 8.3          | 8.5.4.9      | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 271--280  | 5            | 7            | 2.6.4.6.1    | 6            | 8.5.8.4      | 7.4.8        | 5.5.3.5.2    | 5            | 9.3          | 9            | 5 | 5 |10 |10 | 1:1.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    9   | 281--290  | 5            | 5.7          | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 2.5          | 8.3          | {7.3.8.6.8   | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.7.3.9     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 291--300  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.3          | 9            | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   | 301--310  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 5.2          | 5            | 9.5.3        | 9            | 7 | 3 |20 |10 | 1:0.50
   10   | 311--320  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 7.4.8        | 2            | 5            | 9.3          | 9            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   | 321--330  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 5.2.6        | 8.7.4        | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.3          | 9            | 7 | 3 |14 | 6 | 1:0.43
   12   | 331--340  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 8.3          | 9            | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   | 341--350  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 5.2          | 5            | 9.3          | 9            | 7 | 3 |15 | 5 | 1:0.33
   13   | 351--360  | 5            | 5.7          | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 5.2          | 5            | 3            | 9            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   | 361--370  | 5            | 7            | 6.1          | 6            | 4            | 8            | 5.2          | 3.2.5        | 9.3          | 9            | 6 | 4 |13 | 7 | 1:0.54
   14   | 371--380  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 3            | 7.4.3.9      | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   | 381--390  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 9.3          | 4.7.3.9      | 7 | 3 |15 | 5 | 1:0.33
   15   | 391--400  | 5            | 5.5.7        | 1            | 3.6          | 8.4          | 8            | 3.2          | 5            | 8.3          | 9            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 401--410  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 7.3          | 6.5.3.9      | 7 | 3 |12 | 8 | 1:0.67
   16   | 411--420  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 3            | 9            | 9 | 1 |   |   |
    "   | 421--430  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 4            | 8            | 2            | 5            | 3            | 4.7.4.9      | 9 | 1 |   |   |
    "   | 431--440  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 3            | 5.7.3.9      | 8 | 2 |26 | 4 | 1:0.15
   17   | 441--450  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 4            | 4.8          | 2            | 5            | 4.3          | 3.5.9        | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   | 451--460  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 3.6          | 4            | 5.4.8        | 2            | 5            | 9.3          | 9            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   | 461--470  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 4            | 8            | 2            | 5            | 3            | 9            |10 | 0 |24 | 6 | 1:0.25
   19   | 471--480  | 5            | 7            | 1            | 6            | 8.4          | 8            | 2            | 5            | 3            | 9            | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1 | 1:0.11
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |      5.6     |     5.6      | 4.5.6.7.8.9  | 4.5.6.7.8.9  |  1.2.3.4.5   |  1.2.3.4.5   | 2.3.4.5.6.7  | 2.3.4.5.6.7  | 3.4.5.6.7.8  | 3.4.5.6.7.8  |   |   |   |   |
        |           +--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
   19   |   1--10   | 5            | 6            | 4            | 9            | 1            | 5            | 3.7.2        | 7            | 3            | 8            | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1 | 1:0.11
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========

[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]



The data of table 6 indicate for this problem only three pronounced
reactive tendencies: (a) As the initial tendency, the choice of the
second box from the right end. This proved surprisingly weak, in view of
the animal's long training on problem 2, and it disappeared quickly. (b)
Choice of the end boxes, and (c) direct choice of the right box.

For this, as for the other problems, extreme differences in method and
in time and degree of success appear for the different settings. Thus,
while settings 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, and 10 proved to be easy, settings 4, 5,
8, and 9 were evidently more difficult.

[Illustration: FIGURE 20.--Error curve of learning for the solution of
problem 3 (alternately the first box at the left end and the first at
the right end) by Sobke.]

From the first this problem promised to be much easier for Sobke than
problem 2, and although the actual number of trials necessary for the
solution is greater by sixty for problem 3 than for problem 2,
comparison of the data of the tables justifies the statement that the
third problem was both easier and more nearly adequately solved than the
second. This is not surprising when the nature of the two problems is
considered, for whereas problem 2 requires choice by perception of the
relationship of secondness from the right end of the group, problem 3
requires, instead, the choice of the end member of the group each time,
with the additional variation of alternation of ends. Now as it happens,
the end member is easily selected by the monkey, and it appears further
that alternation was relatively easy for Sobke to acquire. Consequently,
the combination of end and alternation proved easier than the choice of
the second from the right end of the group.

The above statements are supported by comparison of the curves of
learning. The curve for problem 2, figure 19, is extremely irregular;
that for problem 3, figure 20, much more regular. Similarly, the daily
ratios of right to wrong choices as exhibited in tables 5 and 6 indicate
smaller variations for the third problem than for the second.

Sobke made ten correct first choices in the third series for July 17,
but he was working very uncertainly and it seemed rather a matter of
good luck than good management that he succeeded in presenting this
perfect series: For this reason and also because it did not seem
feasible to have Sunday intervene between the final and perfect regular
series and the control series, an additional regular series was given on
July 19, in which, as the table indicates, a single mistake occurred, in
trial 5. The monkey was working perfectly. The series of trials required
only ten minutes, and it was evident that carelessness and eagerness to
obtain food were chiefly responsible for the mistake.

The control series given on July 19 immediately after the series just
described resulted similarly in one failure and nine successes. The
choices were made easily and with certainty, and the only mistake, that
of setting 7, was apparently due to carelessness.

This excellent showing for the control series wholly justifies the
comparison of problems 2 and 3 as to difficultness, made above. Whereas
in both problems 1 and 2 the control trials caused confusion, in the
case of problem 3, they did not essentially alter the behavior of the
animal. The fact seems to be that for this problem the particular
setting is of relatively little importance; while turning alternately to
the extreme left and the extreme right is of prime importance. That
Sobke had the idea of alternation or of the end box, there seems no more
reason for insisting than that he had the idea of secondness from the
right end in problem 2. It is possible, even probable, that these ideas
existed rather vaguely in his consciousness, but there is obviously no
necessity for insisting that the solution of the problems depended upon
them.


_Problem 4. Middle_

As the available time for the continuation of the experiment was
limited, it was decided to proceed with work on problem 4 immediately
upon the completion of problem 3, and on July 20, the problem of the
middle door was presented to Sobke. Since it was anticipated that this
sudden change would confuse and discourage him greatly, the only form of
punishment administered was the momentary lowering of the entrance door
of the wrong box. As in the previous problem, he was aided after ten
successive wrong choices. As might have been anticipated, he
persistently entered the end boxes of the groups, and this in some
instances probably would have been kept up for many minutes had not the
experimenter lured him into the right box by slightly raising the exit
door. In the first series, he had to be aided in five of the ten trials.
The total time for the series was forty-five minutes, the total number
of choices, eighty-eight. In the second series, he was aided in four of
the trials. The total time required was seventy-two minutes, and the
total number of choices was seventy-six.

Throughout the first series, Sobke worked hard, but with evidently
increasing dissatisfaction. He clung persistently to his acquired
tendency to choose the end boxes, and after each trial he returned less
willingly to the starting point. Up to this time his attitude toward the
experimenter had been perfectly friendly, if not wholly trustful. But
when on July 21 he was brought into the apparatus for the second series,
he exhibited a wholly new form of behavior, for instead of attending
diligently to the open doors and devoting his energies to trying to find
the right box, he instead, after gazing at them for a few seconds,
turned toward the experimenter and jumped for him savagely, throwing
himself against the wire netting with great force. This was repeated a
number of times during the first two or three trials, and it occurred
less frequently later in the series. Since nothing unusual had happened
outside of the experiment room, the suggested explanation of this sudden
change in attitude and behavior is that the monkey resented and blamed
on the experimenter the difficulty which he was having in obtaining
food.

From this time on until the end of my work, Sobke was always savage and
both in and out of the apparatus he was constantly on the watch for an
opportunity to spring upon me. Previously, it had been possible for me
to coax him into the apparatus by offering him food and to return him to
his cage by walking after him. But on and after the twenty-first of
July, it was impossible for me to approach him without extreme risk of
being bitten.

Doctor Hamilton when told of this behavior, reported that several times
monkeys have shown resentment toward him when they were having trouble
in the experiment. I therefore feel fairly confident that I have not
misinterpreted Sobke's behavior. When on July 22 I gave Sobke an
opportunity to enter the apparatus, he refused, and it was impossible to
lure him in with food. Two hours later, having waited meantime for his
breakfast, he entered readily and worked steadily and persistently
through his third series of trials, but in no one of these trials did he
choose correctly. Neither on this day nor the following did he exhibit
resentment while at work. He apparently had regained his affective poise
and was able to attend as formerly to the task of locating his rewards.

During these first three series, although the ratio of right to wrong
choices stood 0 to 10, there occurred a marked reduction in the number
of trials in which aid was necessary as well as in the total number of
choices, and on July 23 correct reactions began to appear. Improvement
during the next hundred trials was steady and fairly rapid, and on July
31, a record of seven right to three wrong trials was obtained. This was
surprising to the experimenter, as well as gratifying, since he was
eager to have the animal complete this problem before work should have
to be discontinued.

Everything went smoothly until August 2, when my assistant, who had been
left in charge of the experimental work for a week, attempted to
increase the number of trials per day to two series. Sobke apparently
was not quite ready for this increase in the amount of his day's labor
and refused to work at the end of the first series. In this series he
did less well than on the previous day. The following day, August 3,
unfortunately and contrary to the wishes of the experimenter, the
laboratory was painted and there was necessarily considerable
disturbance because of the presence of the workmen, and in addition, the
pervasive odor of fresh paint. Sobke chose still less successfully on
this date, and on August 4, he refused to work after the eighth trial.
It is true that during these bad days the total number of choices
steadily diminished while the successes, also, diminished, or at best,
failed to increase. When on August 9, I returned to the laboratory to
take charge, I found that Sobke was no longer trying to solve the
problem as when I had gone away. His attitude had changed in that he had
become indifferent, careless, and obviously discouraged with his task.



TABLE 7

Results for Sobke, _P. rhesus_, in Problem 4


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |   1.2.3.4    |              |              |  1.2.3.4.5   |              |              |   3.4.5.6    |              | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |    2.3.4     |  5.6.7.8.9   |    5.6.7     |    7.8.9     |  4.5.6.7.8   |   6.7.8.9    |    1.2.3     |  2.3.4.5.6   |    7.8.9     |     6.7.8    |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  July  |           |              | {5.9.5.5     | {1.7.1.3     | {9.7.9.7     |              | {1.9.3.1     |              | {6.3.2.6     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   20   |    1- 10  | 2.4.2.4.3    | {5.9.5.6     | {1.7.1.7     | {7.9.7.9     | {8.4.8.4     | {9.2.9.3     | 3.1.3.2      | {3.6.3.2     | {9.3.4.3     | {8.6.6.8.6   | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           |              | {5.8.7*      | {1.7.4*      | {7.7.8       | {4.6         | {9.1.5*      |              | {6.3.4*      | {3.9.3.6     | {8.6.8.6.7   |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {7.9.7.7     | {4.8.5.5     | {1.4.3.2     |              |              | {3.9.3.8     |              |   |   |   |   |
   21   |   11- 20  | 2.3          | {5.6.5.5     | {1.2.7.1     | {7.9.7.7     | {8.4.8.4     | {8.9.1.9     | 3.1.2        | {6.2.3.2.6   | {4.3.3.5     | 6.7          | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           |              | {9.5.5.7     | {7.3.7.4     | {9.7.8*      | {5.4.6*      | {1.9.5*      |              | {3.5.2.4     | {3.4.6*      |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {3.7.4.8     |              |   |   |   |   |
   22   |   21- 30  | 2.3          | 5.6.5.6.7    | 1.7.4        | {7.9.7       | 4.7.4.6      | {1.4.6.3     | 3.1.2        | 5.2.6.4      | {4.3.5.8     | 6.6.7        | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           |              |              |              | {7.7.8       |              | {2.7.5       |              |              | {3.7.6*      |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.4.7.4     |              |   |   |   |   |
   23   |   31- 40  | 2.4.3        | 5.6.8.7      | 1.7.4        | {7.7.7.7     | 4.7.6        | 2.7.5        | 3.1.2        | 6.4          | {7.5.4.3     | 7            | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              | {7.7.8       |              |              |              |              | {7.3.6       |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   24   |   41- 50  | 3            | 5.6.7        | 1.6.4        | 7.7.7.8      | 4.7.6        | {2.7.6.4     | 3.2          | 6.5.4        | 5.3.8.6.6    | 7            | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {2.7.3.8     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {9.6.5*      |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   26   |   51- 60  | 4.3          | 6.5.7        | 2.7.4        | 7.8          | 6            | {6.4.2.7     | 3.2          | {6.5.3.5.2   | 7.6          | 7            | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {4.8.6.5     |              | {6.5.6.4     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {4.7.3.7     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   27   |   61- 70  | 3            | 6.5.7        | 2.5.4        | 7.7.8        | 5.7.6        | {4.6.1.4     | 2            | 6.5.4        | 5.7.6        | 6.7          | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {7.3.5       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   28   |   71- 80  | 3            | 7            | 6.5.4        | 7.8          | 5.4.7.6      | 2.7.6.5      | 2            | 5.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   29   |   81- 90  | 3            | 6.5.7        | 2.4          | 7.7.8        | 5.4.6        | {2.7.7.6     | 2            | 4            | 5.4.7.6      | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {2.7.6.5     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   30   |   91-100  | 3            | 7            | 2.6.5.4      | 7.8          | 6            | 5            | 2            | 5.4          | 5.4.6        | 7            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
   31   |  101-110  | 3            | 7            | 2.4          | 7.8          | 6            | 5            | 2            | 4            | 7.6          | 7            | 7 | 3 | 7 | 3 | 1: 0.43
 August |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    2   |  111-120  | 3            | 7            | 6.5.7.6.4    | 7.8          | 6            | 4.2.7.6.5    | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
    3   |  121-130  | 3            | 6.5.7        | 7.6.5.4      | 7.8          | 7.6          | 5            | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    4   |  131-140  | 3            | 7            | 6.5.7.6.4    | 7.8          | 6            | {2.7.6.4     | 2            | 6.4          | 3.5.4.6      | 7            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {8.7.6.5     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           | {2.4.4.4     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    5   |  141-150  | {2.4.4.2     | 6.5.7        | {2.7.6.7     | 8            | 7.6          | {2.8.7.6     | 3.2          | 6.4          | 7.6          | 8.7          | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           | {4.3*        |              | {5.4         |              |              | {8.6.5       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    6   |  151-160  | 2.4.4.3      | 7            | 2.6.5.4      | 7.8          | 7.6          | 7.6.5        | 2            | 6.4          | 6            | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           | {4.4.2.4     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  161-170  | {4.2.4.2     | 7            | 6.5.4        | 7.8          | 7.6          | 7.6.5        | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6          | 7            | 2 | 8 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
        |           | {4.4.3       |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    7   |  171-180  | 4.3          | 7            | 6.5.4        | 8            | 7.6          | 5            | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  181-190  | {4.2.4.4     | 7            | 7.6.5.4      | 7.8          | 6            | 6.5          | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
        |           | {2.4.3       |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    9   |  191-200  | 3            | 7            | 5.4          | 8            | 8.7.6        | 6.5          | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 8.7          | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   10   |  201-210  | 3            | 7            | 2.5.4        | 7.8          | 7.6          | {2.8.7.6     | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {8.7.6.5     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   11   |  211-220  | 3            | 7            | 6.5.4        | 7.8          | 6            | {7.6.4.3     | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {2.7.6.5     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   12   |  221-230  | 3            | 7            | 2.4          | 7.8          | 6            | 7.6.5        | 2            | 6.5.4        | 8.7.6        | 7            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
   19   |  231-240  | 3            | 7            | 2.4          | 7.8          | 6            | 5            | 2            | 6.4          | 8.7.6        | 7            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   20   |  241-250  | 3            | 7            | 5.4          | 8            | 7.6          | {2.4.1.2.7   | 3.2          | 6.4          | 7.6          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {8.7.6.5     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   21   |  251-260  | 3            | 7            | 6.5.4        | 7.8          | {7.4.5.4     | {6.4.3.2     | 2            | 6.5.4        | 8.7.6        | 7            | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              | {8.7.6       | {7.6.5       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   23   |  261-270  | 3            | 7            | 6.5.4        | 7.8          | 6            | 6.5          | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
   24   |  271-280  | 3            | 7            | 6.4          | 7.8          | 7.6          | 2.5          | 2            | 4            | 7.4.3.8.7.6  | 7            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
   25   |  281-290  | 3            | 7            | 2.5.4        | 8            | 7.6          | 5            | 2            | 6.4          | 7.6          | 7            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
   26   |  291-300  | 3            | 7            | 6.5.4        | 8            | 7.6          | 7.6.5        | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.6          | 7            | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1: 1.00
   27   |  301-310  | 3            | 7            | 2.6.5.4      | 8            | 7.6          | 5            | 2            | 6.5.4        | 7.5.4.9.8.6  | 7            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
   28   |  311-320  | 3            | 7            | 2.5.4        | 8            | 6            | 9.8.7.5      | 2            | 3.4          | 8.6          | 7            | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1: 0.67
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========

[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]



I immediately set about reinstating the former attitude by lessening the
number of trials and the punishment, and by increasing the value of the
reward, but my best efforts, continuing up to August 28, failed markedly
to improve the condition. The number of correct choices did somewhat
increase, but at no time did the animal attain the degree of success
which he had achieved as early as July 31 in the eleventh series of
trials.

During the last two weeks of experimentation, all possible efforts were
put forth to discover the best combination of rewards and punishments.
Punishment was varied from 0 to confinement of sixty seconds, and many
kinds of food in different amounts were tried as rewards, but in spite
of everything Sobke failed to improve markedly. From time to time,
notably on August 12 and 21, he exhibited peculiarly strong resentment
toward me and repeatedly attempted to attack me.

The outcome of my experiments with problem 4 is peculiarly interesting
in that it indicates the importance of a favorable attitude toward the
work and the extreme risk from disturbing or discouraging conditions. It
seems not improbable that had the work progressed without change in
experimenter, or method of procedure, and above all without the
disturbance of the painting, Sobke might have solved problem 4 within a
few days. This is by no means certain, however, for in problems 2 and 3
the ratio of right to wrong choices instead of increasing steadily
increased very irregularly.

The detailed results for this problem are given in table 7. Reactive
tendencies which appear are: (a) persistent choice of the end boxes
followed, subsequently, by (b) the tendency to locate the middle box
directly. This proved fairly easy when the number of boxes involved was
only three as in settings 1, 4, 7, and 10. Setting 4 was most difficult
of all, because box 9 was avoided or ignored. When the number of open
boxes was as great as five, as in settings 2 and 8, the task was
obviously more difficult, but whereas success in setting 2 appeared
early, in setting 8 it failed to appear during the course of
experimentation. For the settings 3, 6, and 9, involving either seven or
nine open boxes, the direct choice of the middle box was next to
impossible, and Sobke tended to choose, first of all, a particular box
toward one end of the series, for example, box 2, in setting 3, and box
7 in setting 9. To the experimenter, as he watched the animal's
behavior, it looked as though effort each time were being made to locate
the middle member of the group. This appeared relatively easy for groups
of three boxes, extremely difficult for as many as five boxes, and
almost impossible for seven or nine.


3. Julius, _Pongo pygmaeus_

_Problem 1. First at the Left End_

The orang utan, Julius, was gentle, docile, and friendly with the
experimenter throughout the period of investigation. He at no time
showed inclination to bite and could be handled safely. As contrasted
with Skirrl and even with Sobke, he adapted himself to the
multiple-choice apparatus very promptly, and only slight effort on the
part of the observer was necessary to prepare him, by preliminary
trials, for the regular experiments. But in order to facilitate work, he
was familiarized with the apparatus by means of regular route training
and feeding in the several boxes from April 5 to April 9.

On April 10 the apparatus was painted white as has been stated
previously, and on the following Monday, April 12, Julius when again
introduced to it gave no indications of fear, uneasiness, or dislike,
but worked as formerly, making his round trips quickly and eagerly
entering any box which happened to be open, in order to obtain the
reward of food.

The regular experimentation was undertaken on April 13, and the results
of the first series of trials with Julius are sharply contrasted with
those obtained with the monkeys in that fewer choices were necessary.
Instead of the expected ratio of right to wrong first choices, 1 to 2.5,
the orang utan gave a ratio of 1 to 1. An additional markedly different
result from that obtained with the monkeys is indicated below in the
total time required for a series of trials. As examples, the data for
the first, second, fifth, and tenth series are presented.



TIME FOR SERIES OF TRIALS

        1st series  2nd series  5th series  10th series
Skirrl  35 min.     20 min.     14 min.     10 min.
Sobke   14  "       17  "       10  "        9  " (8th series)
Julius  12  "       11  "       14  "        9  "



It is also noteworthy that Julius in the presence of visitors or under
other unusual conditions worked steadily and well, whereas the monkeys,
and especially Sobke, tended to be distracted and often refused to work
at all.

Almost from the beginning of his work on problem l, Julius began to
develop the tendency to enter immediately the open door nearest the
starting point. In case the group of open doors lay to the right of the
middle of the apparatus, this method naturally yielded success; whereas
if the group included doors to the left of the middle, it resulted in
failure. Obviously it was a most unsatisfactory method, and although it
enabled him to make more right than wrong first choices, it prevented
him from increasing the number of right choices, and as table 1
indicates, it maintained the ratio of 1 right to .67 wrong first choices
for eight successive days.

On April 23 a break occurred in which the number of correct choices was
reduced from six to five. Julius worked very rapidly and with almost no
hesitation in choosing. My notes record "he seems to miss the point
wholly. It is doubtful whether the punishment is sufficiently severe."
At this time he was being punished by thirty seconds confinement in each
wrong box, the interval having been held fairly steadily from the first
series of experiments. On April 26 it was increased to sixty seconds, in
an effort to break him of the habit of choosing the "nearest" door. But
he became extremely restless under the longer confinement and tried his
best to raise the entrance and exit doors. Since there was at this time
no mechanism for locking them when closed, it was difficult for the
experimenter to prevent him from escaping by way of the entrance door or
from raising the exit door sufficiently to obtain the food. Indeed, the
longer confinement worked so unsatisfactorily that on the following day
I substituted for it the punishment of forcing him to raise the entrance
door of the wrong box in order to escape for a new choice. He was
rewarded with food in the alleyway H, beside door 15 (figure 17), only
when he chose correctly on first attempt.

This method discouraged him extremely and proved wasteful of time.
Consequently, in a second series on the same date return was made to the
former method, and he was rewarded with food whenever he found the right
box. But on April 28, the two methods were again employed, the first in
the initial series and the second in a final series of trials. The
animal's persistent attempts to raise the doors gave the experimenter so
much trouble that on April 29 barbed wire was nailed over the windows of
the entrance doors with the hope that it might prevent him from working
at them. But he quickly learned to place his fingers between the barbs
and raise the doors as effectively as ever.

On April 30 the reward of food was given only when the first choice was
that of the right box and in that event it was placed in the alleyway H
as stated above.

As it seemed absolutely essential to break the unprofitable habit of
choosing the nearest door, on May 3 a new series of settings was
presented, in which only the doors to the left of the middle of the row
of nine boxes were used as right doors. That is, in this new series,
doors 1 to 4 occur as right doors; 5 to 9 do not. As punishment for
wrong choices on this date, Julius was confined in the wrong box from
one to five minutes. It was difficult to keep him in, but by means of
cords which had been attached to the doors, this was successfully
accomplished. Yet another and slightly different series of settings was
employed on May 4, and this, proving satisfactory, was continued in use
until the end of the experiment, with punishment ranging from sixty to
one hundred and twenty seconds for each mistake.

Naturally the modification of settings introduced May 3 greatly
increased the proportion of wrong first choices. Indeed, as appears in
table 8, the ratio of right to wrong immediately changed from 1:0.67 to
1:4.00. Between May 3 and May 10, no steady and consistent improvement
in method or in the number of correct first choices occurred, and on the
last named date, Julius chose correctly only three times in his ten
trials. At this time there was, as my notes record, no satisfactory
indication of progress, and the status of the experiment seemed
extremely unsatisfactory in as much as in spite of the experimenter's
best efforts to break up the habit of choosing the nearest door, the
orang utan still persisted, to a considerable extent, in the use of this
method. The only encouraging feature of the results was an evident
tendency to choose somewhat nearer the left end of a group than
previously.




TABLE 8

Results for Orang utan in Problem 1

========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |    1.2.3     |     8.9      |  3.4.5.6.7   |    7.8.9     |  2.3.4.5.6   |    6.7.8     |    5.6.7     |  4.5.6.7.8   |    7.8.9     |     1.2.3    |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
 April  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   13   |    1- 10  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.2         | 7.6          | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
   14   |   11- 20  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.4.2       | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   15   |   21- 30  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.5.5.2     | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   16   |   31- 40  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.2         | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   17   |   41- 50  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.2         | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   19   |   51- 60  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.2         | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   20   |   61- 70  | 2.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  5.3.2       | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   21   |   71- 80  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  5.4.3.2     | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   22   |   81- 90  | 3.1          | 8            | 5.3          | 7            |  6.3.2       | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   23   |   91-100  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 5.3          | 7            |  4.3.2       | 6            | 5            | 5.4          | 7            | 3.2.1        | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
   24   |  101-110  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.3.2       | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 | 6 | 4 | 1:0.67
   26   |  111-120  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.3.2       | 6            | 5            | 5.4          | 7            | 3.1          | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
   27   |  121-130  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.3.2       | 6            | 6.5          | 5.8.6.4      | 7            | 3.3.3.1      | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  131-140  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.3.2       | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 6 | 4 |10 |10 | 1:1.00
   28   |  141-150  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 3            | 7            |  5.4.2       | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   |  151-160  | 3.1          | 8            | 3            | 7            |  3.2         | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 7 | 3 |14 | 6 | 1:0.43
   29   |  161-170  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.3.2       | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   |  171-180  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.2         | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 6 | 4 |12 | 8 | 1:0.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   30   |  181-190  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | {4.5.6.4     | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.6.4.2     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  191-200  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.5.6.7.3    | 7            |  4.5.3.2     | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.2.1        | 6 | 4 |12 | 8 | 1:0.67
   May  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    1   |  201-210  | 3.1          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  3.2         | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   |  211-220  | 3.2.1        | 8            | 4.3          | 7            |  4.2         | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 3.1          | 6 | 4 |12 | 8 | 1:0.67
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |   2.3.4.5    |              |              |              |              |              |              |    2.3.4.5   |   |   |   |   |
        |           |    1.2.3     |  3.4.5.6.7   |    6.7.8     |    1.2.3     |  3.4.5.6.7   | 4.5.6.7.8.9  |   2.3.4.5    |     1.2.3    | 4.5.6.7.8.9  |    6.7.8.9   |   |   |   |   |
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
    3   |  221-230  | 3.1          | 4.3          | 4.2          | 3.1          | 4.3          | 4            | 4.3.2        | 3.1          | 4            | 4.3.2        | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |   2.3.4.5    |   4.5.6.7    |              |              |              |              |   2.3.4.5    |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |    1.2.3     |  3.4.5.6.7   |    6.7.8     |     8.9      |   2.3.4.5    |   3.4.5.6    |    1.2.3     |  4.5.6.7.8   |   6.7.8.9    |     1.2.3    |   |   |   |   |
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
    4   |  231-240  | 3.2.1        | 4.3          | 4.2          | 4            | 4.3.2        | 4.3          | 3.2.1        | 4            | 3.2          | 3.2.1        | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
    5   |  241-250  | 2.1          | 3            | 3.2          | 4            | 3.2          | 4.3          | 3.2.1        | 4            | 3.2          | 3.2.1        | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
    6   |  251-260  | 2.1          | 3            | 2            | 4            | 3.2          | 3            | 2.1          | 4            | 3.2          | 2.1          | 5 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 1:1.00
    7   |  261-270  | 2.1          | 3            | 3.2          | 4            | 3.2          | 3            | 2.1          | 4            | 4.2          | 2.1          | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1:1.50
    8   |  271-280  | 2.1          | 4.3          | 4.3.2        | 4            | 3.2          | 4.3          | 3.1          | 4            | 3.2          | 2.1          | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1:4.00
   10   |  281-290  | 1            | 4.3          | 4.2          | 4            | 3.2          | 4.3          | 2.1          | 4            | 3.2          | 2.1          | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1:2.33
   11   |  291-300  | 1            | 3            | 2            | 4            | 2            | 3            | 1            | 4            | 2            | 1            |10 | 0 |10 | 0 | 1:0.00
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |    1.2.3     |     8.9      |  3.4.5.6.7   |    7.8.9     |  2.3.4.5.6   |    6.7.8     |    5.6.7     |  4.5.6.7.8   |     7.8.9    |     1.2.3    |   |   |   |   |
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
   12   |  301-310  | 1            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 2            | 6            | 5            | 4            | 7            | 1            |10 | 0 |10 | 0 | 1:0.00
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========



A series of correct first choices was obtained on May 11, greatly to the
surprise of the experimenter, for no indication had previously appeared
of this approaching solution of the problem. It seemed possible,
however, that the successes were accidental, and it was anticipated that
in a control series Julius would again make mistakes. But on the
following day, May 12, the presentation of the original series of ten
settings, which, of course, differed radically from the settings used
from May 4 to May 11 was responded to promptly, readily, and without a
single mistake. Julius had solved his problem suddenly and, in all
probability, ideationally.

Only three reactive tendencies or methods appeared during Julius's work
on this problem: (a) choice of the open door nearest to the starting
point (sometimes the adjacent boxes were entered); (b) a tendency to
avoid the "nearest" door and select instead one further toward the left
end of the group; (c) direct choice of the first door on the left.

The curve of learning plotted from the daily wrong choices and presented
in figure 18, had it been obtained with a human subject, would
undoubtedly be described as an ideational, and possibly even as a
rational curve; for its sudden drop from near the maximum to the base
line strongly suggests, if it does not actually prove, insight.

Never before has a curve of learning like this been obtained from an
infrahuman animal. I feel wholly justified in concluding from the
evidences at hand, which have been presented as adequately as is
possible without going into minutely detailed description, that the
orang utan solved this simple problem ideationally. As a matter of fact,
for the solution he required about four times the number of trials which
Sobke required and twice as many as were necessary for Skirrl. Were we
to measure the intelligence of these three animals by the number of
trials needed in problem 1, Sobke clearly would rank first, Skirrl
second, and Julius last of all. But other facts clearly indicate that
Julius is far superior to the monkeys in intelligence. We therefore must
conclude that _where very different methods of learning appear, the
number of trials is not a safe criterion of intelligence._ The
importance of this conclusion for comparative and genetic psychology
needs no emphasis.


_Problem 2. Second from the Right End_

Julius was given four days' rest before being presented with problem 2.
He was occasionally fed in the apparatus, but regular continuation of
training was not necessary to keep him in good form. During this rest
interval, locks were attached to the doors of the apparatus so that the
experimenter by moving a lever directly in front of him could fasten
either one or both of the doors of a given box by a single movement. On
May 13 Julius was given opportunity to obtain food from each of the
boxes in turn, and trial of the locks was made in order to familiarize
him with the new situation. He very quickly discovered that the doors
could not be raised when closed, and after two days of preliminary work,
he practically abandoned his formerly persistent efforts to open them.
The locks worked satisfactorily from a mechanical point of view as well
as from that of the adaptation of the animal to the modified situation.

Problem 2 was regularly presented for the first time on May 17, on which
day a single series was given. The period of punishment adopted was
twenty seconds, and for each successful choice a small piece of banana
was given as a reward. After the first trial in this series, in which
Julius repeatedly entered the first box at the left, that is box 7,
there was but slight tendency to re√´nter the first box at the left of
the group. Instead, Julius developed the method of moving box by box
toward the right end of the group. The choices were made promptly, and
their systematic character enabled the animal to obtain his reward
fairly quickly, in spite of the large number of mistakes.

In the second series, the orang utan developed the interesting trick of
quickly dodging out of the wrong box before the experimenter could lower
the door behind him. This he did only after having been punished for
many wrong choices to the point of discouragement. The trick was easily
broken up by the sudden lowering of the entrance door as soon as he had
passed under it.

There appeared on May 21 an unfavorable physical condition which
manifested itself, first of all through the eyes which appeared dull and
bloodshot. On the following day they were inflamed and the lids nearly
closed. Julius refused to eat, and experimentation was impossible. Until
June 2 careful treatment and regulation of diet was necessary. He passed
through what at the time seemed a rather startling condition, but
rapidly regained his usual good health, and on June 3, although somewhat
weak and listless, he again worked fairly steadily.

Since it was now possible to lock the doors and confine the animal for
any desired period, on June 5 the interval of punishment was made sixty
seconds, and a liberal quantity of banana, beet, or carrot was offered
as reward. No increase in the number of successful choices appeared, and
Julius showed discouragement. Sawdust had been strewn on the floor, and
in the intervals between trials as well as during confinement in wrong
boxes, he took to playing with the sawdust. He would take it up in one
hand and pour it from hand to hand until all had slipped through his
fingers, then he would scrape together another handful and go through
the same process. Often he became so intent on this form of amusement
that even when the exit door was raised, he would not immediately go to
get the food.

The reactive tendencies which appeared in the work on problem 2 will now
be presented in order, since I shall have to refer to them repeatedly,
and the list will be more useful to the reader at this point than at the
conclusion of the presentation of daily results. The following is not an
exhaustive list but includes only the most important and conspicuous
tendencies or methods together with the dates on which they were most
apparent.

(a) May 17, choice of first box at left of group or near it, then the
next in order, and so on, until the second from the right was reached.
This method with irregularities and certain definite skipping was used
at various times, sometimes over periods of several days, during the
course of the work.

(b) June 3, preference for number 3 and number 4 developed immediately
after the orang utan's illness and when he was working rather
listlessly.

On June 9 and 10, the original tendency (a) reappeared and persisted for
a number of series.

(c) June 14, a tendency to choose the box at or near the right end of a
group, and then the one next to it. In connection with this tendency,
which of course required only two choices in any given trial, interest
in playing with the sawdust on the floor developed.

Again on June 21, the animal returned to the use of tendency (a).

(d) June 29, movement to box at right end of group, hesitation before
it, and turning through a complete circle so that the second box from
the right was faced. This, the correct box, was often promptly entered.
This method, if persisted in, would obviously have yielded solution of
the problem.

(e) July 5, approach to and pretense to enter the box next to the right
end (right one), and then choice of some other box. This _feint_ is
peculiarly interesting, and its origin and persistence are difficult to
account for.

(f) In connection with the tendency to pretend that he was going to
enter the second box from the right end, Julius developed also the
tendency to turn around in front of the box at the right end, starting
sometimes to back into it, and then to enter, instead, the box second
from the end.

(g) July, 6 and 7, a fairly definite tendency to take the one next in
order or, instead, to go directly to the right box.

(h) July 10, direct first choices without approach to other boxes
appeared for the first time on this date.

For this problem, it proved impossible to establish and maintain uniform
conditions of experimentation. Instead, because of the failure of the
animal to improve and the tendency to discouragement, both punishment
and reward had to be altered from time to time, and other and more
radical changes were occasionally made in the experimental procedure.
Below for the sake of condensed and consecutive presentation, the most
important conditions from day to day are arranged in tabular form:



CONDITIONS OF EXPERIMENT FROM DAY To DAY FOR PROBLEM 2

Date                     Punishment                   Reward

May  17  ............. 20 sec. confinement ........ Food in right box for each
                         (Aid after 10 trials)        trial

 "   18 to 21 ........ 30 sec. confinement ........ Food (banana) in right box
                                                      for each trial

 "   22 to June 2 .... Illness, no experiments

June 3 ............... 15 sec. confinement ........ Food (banana) in right box
                                                      for each trial

 "   4 ............... 30  "        " ............. Food (banana) in right box
                                                      for each trial

 "   5-10 ............ 60  "        " ............. Beet, carrot and loquat, in
                                                      addition to banana

 "   11 .............. 10 to 30 sec. confinement .. Beet, carrot and loquat, in
                                                      addition to banana

 "   12 to 15 ........ 60 sec. confinement ........ Beet, carrot and loquat, in
                                                      addition to banana

 "   16 .............. 60  "        " ............. Banana and sweet corn--former
                                                      preferred

 "   17 (1st series).  60 sec. confinement ........ Food (banana, as in early
                                                      series)

 "   17 (2nd series).  No confinement in wrong box; Food only for correct first
                         but instead, return to       choices
                         starting point by way of
                         alleys

 "   18 to 22 ........ No confinement in wrong box; Food only for correct first
                         but instead, return to       choices
                         starting point by way of
                         alleys

 "   22 (2nd series).  No punishment; allowed to    Food for each trial
                         enter boxes until right
                         one was found
 "   23 .............. Return to starting point.
                         After five wrong choices
                         of a given box the animal
                         was held for 60 secs. in
                         one of the boxes and was
                         then released by way of
                         the exit door and rewarded
                         when the right one was
                         chosen

 "   23 (2nd series).  No punishment .............. Reward for each trial

 "   24 (1st series).  Return to starting point. .. Food only for correct first
                                                      choices

 "   24 (2nd series).  No punishment .............. Reward for each trial

 "   25-30 ........... Same as on 24th ............

July 1 (1st series).   No punishment ..............   "     "   "     "

 "   1 (2nd series).   Return to starting point ... Reward only for correct first
                                                      choices
 "   2-8 ............. Same as on July 1 ..........

 "   8 (2nd series).   No punishment .............. Reward for each trial

 "   8 (3rd series).   Return to starting point ... Reward only for correct first
                                                      choices

 "   9-10 ............ Same as for July 8 (3rd series)

 "   10 (2nd series).  Momentary confinement in ..... Reward for each correct choice
                         wrong boxes

 "   12 .............. Return to starting point ..... Reward for correct first choice

 "   12 (2nd series).  30 sec. confinement .......... Reward for each correct choice

 "   12 (3rd series).  5   "        " ...............    "    "   "      "      "

 "   13 .............. 30  "        " ...............    "    "   "      "      "

 "   14-17 ........... Return to starting point ..... Reward for correct first choices

 "   17 (2nd series).  60 sec. confinement .......... Reward for each correct choice

 "   19 .............. 30  "        " ...............    "    "   "      "      "

 "   20-26 ........... 10  "        " ...............    "    "   "      "      "

 "   27-30 ........... Right box indicated by slight  Reward in each right box
                         raising of exit door
                         momentarily.
                         No punishment

 "   30 (2nd series).  Return to starting point ..... Reward for correct first choices

 "   31 ..............    "   "     "       "   .....    "    "     "      "      "

 "   31 (2nd series)
       to Aug. 10 .... 10 to 60 sec. confinement .... Reward for each correct choice

Aug. 10 (2nd series).  Threatened with whip .........    "    "   "      "       "

 "   11 (1st series).      "        "   " ...........    "    "   "      "       "

 "   11 (2nd series).  10 sec. confinement ..........    "    "   "      "       "

 "   12 .............. Threatened with whip .........    "    "   "      "       "

 "   12 (2nd series).  10 sec. confinement ..........    "    "   "      "       "

 "   19 .............. 10  "        " ...............    "    "   "      "       "

 "   19 (2nd series).  Threatened with whip .........    "    "   "      "       "




With the above reactive tendencies and modifications of method in mind
we may continue our description of results. On June 9 there developed a
tendency to increase the magnitude of the original error by choosing
nearer the left end of the groups. This is odd, since one would
naturally suppose that an animal as intelligent as the orang utan would
tend to avoid the general region in which success was never obtained and
to focus attention on the right, as contrasted with the wrong end of
each group. _It obviously contradicts the law of the gradual elimination
of use less activities._ In other words, it is wholly at variance with
the principle of trial and error exhibited by many infrahuman organisms.
Julius, although making many mistakes, worked diligently and, for the
most part, fairly rapidly. The day's work proved most important because
of the change in method and also because of the appearance of
hesitation, the rejection of certain boxes, and the definite choice of
others. My notes record "this is a most important day for Julius in
problem 2;" but subsequent results do not clearly justify this prophecy.

The method of choosing the first box at the left and then of moving down
the line until the right one was reached was so consistently followed
that during a number of days it was possible for me to predict almost
every choice. Indeed, to satisfy my curiosity in this matter during a
number of series I guessed in advance the box which would be chosen. The
percentages of correct guesses ranged from ninety to one hundred. June
10, for example, yielded two series for which the ratio of right to
wrong first choices was 0 to 10, and in which the method described above
was used consistently throughout.

It was inevitable that punishment by confinement and the discouragement
resulting therefrom should interfere with the regularity of work and
make it extremely difficult to obtain strictly comparable results from
series to series and from day to day. The data for this problem, as
presented in table 9, have values quite different from those for the
monkeys, chiefly because of the more variable conditions of observation.

It was occasionally noted that the disintegration of a definite method
and the disappearance of the tendency on which it depended occurred
rather suddenly. Frequently it happened that having used an inadequate
method fairly persistently on a given day, the animal would on the
following day exhibit a wholly different method. Even over night a new
method might develop. In the monkeys, although there was occasionally
something comparable with this, it was by no means so evident.



TABLE 9

Results for Orang utan in Problem 2


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |  1.2.3.4.5   |              |              | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |    7.8.9     |   1.2.3.4    | 2.3.4.5.6.7  | 1.2.3.4.5.6  |  4.5.6.7.8   |    1.2.3     |   2.3.4.5    |   6.7.8.9    |   1.2.3.4    | 3.4.5.6.7.8  |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   May  |           | {7.7.7.7     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   17   |    1-  10 | {7.7.7.7     | 1.1.3        | 2.4.6        | 2.3.4.5      | 4.5.7        | 3.2          | 2.3.4        | {2.3.4.5     | 1.2.3        | 3.4.5.6.7    | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           | {7.7.8       |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.7.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.5.6.8     |   |   |   |   |
   18   |   11-  20 | 7.8          | 1.3          | 3.4.5.6      | 2.4.5        | 4.5.6.7      | 2            | 2.3.4        | {2.3.4.5     | 1.2.3        | {8.8.8.3     | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.7.8       |              | {4.5.6.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {2.4.7.7.2   |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.3.4.5     |   |   |   |   |
   19   |   21-  30 |  7.8         | 1.3          | {5.7.7.2     | 5            | 4.6.8.4.7    | 1.2          | 2.3.4        | 5.8          | 3            | {6.8.4.5     | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              | {3.2.4.6     |              |              |              |              |              |              | {3.5.6.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   20   |   31-  40 | {7.9.7.7     | 3            | 4.5.6        | 4.5          | 5.6.7        | 2            | 4            | 5.6.7.8      | 3            | 5.6.7        | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           | {9.7.8       |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   21   |   41-  50 | 7.8          | 3            | 3.4.5.6      | 4.5          | 4.5.6.7      | 2            | 3.4          | 4.5.6.8      | 3            | 4.5.6.7      | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
  June  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    3   |   51-  60 | 7.8          | 3            | 4.5.6        | 3.4.5        | 4.5.6.7      | 3.1.2        | 3.4          | {3.7.9.7     | 3            | 4.5.6.7      | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {9.7.6.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    4   |   61-  70 | 7.8          | 3            | 4.5.6        | 4.5          | 4.5.6.7      | 3.3.1.2      | 4            | 4.5.6.7.8    | 3            | 4.5.6.7      | 3 | 7 | 3 | 7 | 1: 2.33
    5   |   71-  80 | 7.9.7.8      | 3            | 3.4.5.6      | 3.6.3.4.5    | 4.7          | 3.1.2        | 4            | 3.4.5.6.7.8  | 3            | 4.5.6.7      | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |   81-  90 | 7.8          | 3            | 3.4.5.6      | 3.4.5        | 4.5.6.7      | 2            | 3.4          | 3.4.5.6.7.8  | 2.3          | 4.5.6.7      | 2 | 8 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    7   |   91- 100 | 7.8          | 3            | 4.5.6        | 4.5          | 4.5.6.7      | 1.2          | 3.4          | {3.4.5.6     | 2.3          | {3.4.5.6     | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.8         |              | {8.5.6.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    8   |  101- 110 | 7.8          | 3            | 4.5.6        | 4.5          | 4.5.6.7      | 2            | 3.4          | 4.5.6.7.8    | 3            | 4.5.6.7      | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  111- 120 | 7.8          | 3            | 4.5.6        | 3.4.5        | 5.6.7        | 2            | 5.5.2.3.4    | 4.5.6.7.8    | 4.4.1.2.3    | 4.5.6.7      | 2 | 8 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    9   |  121- 130 | 7.8          | 2.3          | 4.5.6        | 4.5          | 4.5.6.7      | 2            | 3.4          | {2.3.4.5     | 1.2.3        | 3.4.5.6.7    | 1 | 9 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.7.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  131- 140 | 7.8          | 1.2.3        | 2.3.4.5.6    | 5            | 4.5.6.7      | 1.2          | 2.3.4        | 6.7.8        | 2.3          | 3.4.5.6.7    | 1 | 9 | 2 |18 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   10   |  141- 150 | 7.8          | 1.2.3        | 2.3.4.5.6    | 1.2.3.4.5    | 4.5.6.7      | 1.2          | 2.3.4        | {1.2.3.4     | 1.2.3        | 3.4.5.6.7    | 0 |10 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.6.7.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  151- 160 | 7.8          | 1.2.3        | 2.3.4.5.6    | 1.2.3.4.5    | 4.5.6.7      | 1.2          | 2.3.4        | {1.2.3.4     | 1.2.3        | 3.4.5.6.7    | 0 |10 | 0 |10 | 0:10.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.6.7.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   11   |  161- 170 | 8            | {4.1.2.4.1   | 2.3.4.5.6    | 5            | 6.7          | {3.1.3.1     | 5.2.3.4      | 2.6.7.8      | 4.1.2.3      | 8.5.6.7      | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              | {4.1.4.1.3   |              |              |              | {3.1.2       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  171- 180 | 9.7.8        | 4.3          | 5.6          | 4.5          | 7            | 3.1.2        | 5.4          | 8            | 4.2.3        | 7            | 3 | 7 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
   12   |  181- 190 | 7.9.7.9.8    | 1.2.3        | 3.4.5.6      | 6.4.5        | 5.6.7        | 2            | 5.3.4        | 7.8          | 4.1.2.3      | 4.5.6.7      | 1 | 9 | 1 | 9 | 1: 9.00
   14   |  191- 200 | 9.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 6.7.8        | 4.2.3        | 7            | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  201- 210 | 8            | 2.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.1.2        | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   15   |  211- 220 | {7.9.7.9     | 4.2.3        | 6            | 5            | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           | {7.9.8       |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  221- 230 | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 5.6.7        | 1.2          | 2.3.4        | 3.4.5.6.7.8  | 4.3          | 7            | 1 | 9 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
   16   |  231- 240 | 7.9.8        | 3            | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 2            | 5.4          | 5.6.7.8      | 4.1.4.3      | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  241- 250 | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 6.7.8        | 4.3          | 6.7          | 1 | 9 | 3 |17 | 1: 5.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   17   |  251- 260 | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | {6.5.4.6     | 3.2          | 5.4          | 6.5.6.7.8    | 3            | 5.6.7        | 1 | 9 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.4.5.7     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.6.6.5.6   |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.5.5.6.6   |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  261- 270 | {9.7.7.7     | 4.4.4.4.3    | 6            | 5            | {6.6.6.6.6   | {3.3.3.3     | 4            | {4.5.4.5.4   | 3            | {5.5.5.5     | 4 | 6 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
        |           | {7.7.7.8     |              |              |              | {6.5.4.5     | {3.3.2       |              | {5.6.7.8     |              | {5.5.8.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.5.5.4     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {4.5.6.7     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   18   |  271- 280 | {7.7.7.7     | 4.4.4.4.3    | 5.5.5.5.6    | 5            | {5.5.5.6     | {3.3.3.      | 4            | {4.6.5.6     | 4.4.3        | 5.6.4.7      | 2 | 8 | 2 | 8 | 1: 4.00
        |           | {7.7.8       |              |              |              | {5.5.6       | {3.3.2       |              | {6.7.4.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           | {7.7.7.9     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   19   |  281- 290 | {9.9.9.7     | {4.4.4       | {5.7.7       | 5            | 5.7          | {3.3.3.3     | 4            | 5.8          | {4.4.4.4     | {6.5.6.5     | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           | {7.7.8       | {4.4.3       | {7.4.6       |              |              | {3.3.2       |              |              | {4.4.3       | {5.5.7       |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  291- 300 | 7.7.7.7.8    | 4.4.4.4.3    | 5.5.6        | 5            | {5.6.6.5.6   | 3.3.2        | {5.5.5.5     | 5.6.8        | 4.4.3        | 6.6.6.7      | 1 | 9 | 3 |17 | 1: 5.67
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.6.6.7     |              | {3.4         |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.6.6.6.7   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   21   |  301- 310 | 7.7.8        | 4.4.3        | 5.6          | 5            | {6.6.6.5     | {3.3.3.3     | 5.5.5.2.4    | {3.4.3.5.5   | {4.2.2.4     | 5.3.7        | 1 | 9 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.6.5.7     | {3.2         |              | {1.1.2.4.7   | {4.3         |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.3.2.2.8   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  311- 320 | {7.7.7.7     | 1.1.1.2.3    | {5.5.4.2     | 1.1.6.5      | 4.6.7        | 1.3.2        | {2.2.2.2     | {1.1.2.3     | {2.2.2.4     | {6.3.3.8     | 0 |10 | 1 |19 | 1:19.00
        |           | {7.7.8       |              | {2.5.6       |              |              |              | {2.2.3.4     | {6.6.6.8     | {2.3         | {4.8.7       |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   22   |  321- 330 | 7.8          | {2.4.2.1.4   | 6            | 5            | 6.6.8.7      | 3.2          | 5.5.3.3.4    | 3.3.7.7.8    | 4.4.4.2.3    | 6.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              | {4.4.4.3     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  331- 340 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 6.7.8        | 3            | 5.6.7        | 4 | 6 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   23   |  341- 350 | 7.8          | 4.2.4.3      | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | {3.3.3.1     | 5.5.4        | {7.5.4.3     | 4.4.4.3      | {6.6.3.6     | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {3.3.3.2     |              | {6.7.7.8     |              | {8.6.8.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  351- 360 | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 6            | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | {6.7.6.5     | 4.3          | 5.6.7        | 1 | 9 | 3 |17 | 1: 5.67
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.6.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   24   |  361- 370 | 7.8          | 4.4.2.3      | 7.7.6        | 6.6.4.5      | 7            | {3.3.3.3     | 5.4          | 8            | 4.4.3        | 5.6.7        | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {3.3.2       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  371- 380 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.8        | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   25   |  381- 390 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 7.7.7.6      | {6.6.6.6     | 8.6.7        | 3.1.2        | 5.3.5.4      | 8            | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {6.4.6.5     |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  391- 400 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 6.5.8.7      | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 5 | 5 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   26   |  401- 410 | 9.9.9.8      | 3            | {7.7.7.7.3   | {6.6.6.6     | 8.8.8.7      | 3.2          | {5.5.5.5     | 7.8          | {4.4.4.4     | 6.6.8.8.7    | 1 | 9 |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {3.7.7.6     | {6.6.5       |              |              | {5.5.4       |              | {4.4.3       |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  411- 420 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   28   |  421- 430 | 8            | {4.4.4.4     | 7.6          | {6.6.3.6     | 7            | {3.3.3.3     | 5.5.5.4      | 9.7.7.5.8    | 4.4.4.3      | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              | {4.4.3       |              | {6.6.6.5     |              | {3.3.2       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  431- 440 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.6.5.4     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  441- 450 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | {3.2.1.5     | 4.3          | 7            | 2 | 8 | 8 |22 | 1: 2.75
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.9.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   29   |  451- 460 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 6.6.6.5      | 8.6.7        | {3.3.3.3     | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {3.3.2       |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  461- 470 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 8.7          | 3.2          | 3.2.3.4      | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   |  471- 480 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 7.7.6        | 6.6.5        | 7            | 2            | 5.5.5.5.5.4  | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 7            | 4 | 6 |13 |17 | 1: 1.31
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   30   |  481- 490 | 8            | {4.4.4.4     | 7.7.6        | 6.6.6.5      | 8.6.6.5.7    | {3.1.3.3     | 5.5.5.4      | 8            | 4.4.4.3      | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              | {4.4.3       |              |              |              | {3.3.3.2     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  491- 500 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.7.7.6      | 6.6.5        | 8.8.7        | 3.3.3.3.2    | 5.4          | {9.9.7.4     | 3            | 8.8.7        | 2 | 8 | 5 |15 | 1: 3.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {9.6.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
  July  |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    1   |  501- 510 | 9.7.9.8      | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 8.6.7        | 3.3.2        | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  511- 520 | {9.7.7.7     | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.4.5        | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | 8            | 4.4.4.3      | 8.6.5.6.7    | 3 | 7 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
        |           | {7.9.8       |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    2   |  521- 530 | 9.8          | 3            | 7.5.7.6      | 6.4.5        | 8.7          | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  531- 540 | 9.9.7.8      | 3            | 7.4.6        | 5            | 6.6.7        | 3.3.2        | 3.4          | 7.3.5.4.8    | 4.3          | {8.8.6.5     | 2 | 8 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.5.7       |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    3   |  541- 550 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | {6.6.6.6     | 6.8.7        | 3.3.3.2      | 5.5.4        | 9.6.9.6.8    | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {6.6.5       |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  551- 560 | 9.9.7.8      | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 8.6.5.7      | {3.3.3.3     | 5.4          | {7.6.5.7     | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {3.2         |              | {9.7.9.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    5   |  561- 570 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | {8.8.8.8     | {3.3.3.3     | 5.5.5.5.4    | 8            | 4.4.4.3      | 8.8.8.8.7    | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {8.8.7       | {3.3.3.2     |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  571- 580 | 9.8          | 4.4.4.3      | 6            | 6.5          | 8.8.7        | {3.3.3.3.3   | {5.5.5.5.5   | 7.6.8        | 4.4.3        | 7            | 2 | 8 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              | {3.3.3.2     | {5.5.5.4     |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    6   |  581- 590 | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7.7.6        | 6.6.5        | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  591- 600 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 4.5          | 6.6.6.7      | 2            | 5.3.5.4      | 8            | 4.4.3        | 8.8.8.7      | 5 | 5 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
    7   |  601- 610 | 8            | 1.3          | 6            | 5            | 6.5.7        | 2            | 5.4          | 5.6.6.6.7.8  | 4.3          | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  611- 620 | {9.7.7.7.9   | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.5.6.5.7    | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.9.7.9.8    | {4.4.4.4     | 8.7          | 3 | 7 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
        |           | {7.7.7.8     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.4.4.3     |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    8   |  621- 630 | {9.9.9.7.9   | 4.3          | 6            | 6.6.6.5      | {8.8.8.8     | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.8        | 3            | 7            | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           | {9.9.8       |              |              |              | {5.6.5.7     |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.6.5.7     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  631- 640 | 9.8          | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | {6.5.4.6     | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {9.7.9.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  641- 650 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.9.6.7.9.8  | 3            | 8.6.8.7      | 8 | 2 |17 |13 | 1: 0.76
    9   |  651- 660 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.6.7.6.8    | 3            | 8.6.8.8.4.7  | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   |  661- 670 | 9.9.8        | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.6.7.6.8    | 4.3          | 5.6.8        | 3 | 7 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   10   |  671- 680 | 9.8          | 3            | 5.4.5.6      | 5            | 6.4.8.6.7    | 3.2          | {3.5.3.2.3   | {7.6.5.6     | 3            | 5.4.3.7      | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.3.5.2.4   | {5.8         |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  681- 690 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 6.8.7        | 7 | 3 |10 |10 | 1: 1.00
   12   |  691- 700 | 7.8          | 3            | 5.6          | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 3.4          | 7.7.7.7.8    | 4.2.2.3      | 8.7          | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  701- 710 | 9.8          | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | {7.6.5.4.3   | 3            | 8.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.1.4.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  711- 720 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | {7.6.5.4.3   | 3            | {6.5.4.3.6   | 4 | 6 | 9 |21 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.5.9.8     |              | {5.4.3.8.7   |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   13   |  721- 730 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 6            | 4.3.6.5      | 4.6.5.4.7    | 2            | 4            | {6.5.4.3     | 3            | {5.4.3.6     | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {2.1.8       |              | {8.7         |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.7.5.4     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   14   |  731- 740 | 8            | 3            | 5.5.6        | 5            | {5.6.5.5     | 3.2          | 4            | {7.7.4.6     | 3            | 4.6.7        | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {8.8.7       |              |              | {5.6.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.4.5.5.4   |              | {4.4.4.5.5   |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  741- 750 | 8            | 3            | 5.6          | 5            | {6.5.6.6     | 2            | 4            | {5.6.4.4.4   | 3            | {5.4.8.8.4   | 6 | 4 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.8.4.7     |              |              | {7.6.8       |              | {5.5.6.4.7   |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   15   |  751- 760 | 7.7.9.7.8    | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.6.7        | 2            | 4            | 6.6.8        | 3            | {6.6.6.8     | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.6.7       |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.4.6.6.5   |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  761- 770 | 8            | 3            | 5.6          | 5            | 6.6.6.6.7    | 2            | 3.4          | 5.4.7.8      | 3            | {5.3.5.8.5   | 5 | 5 |11 | 9 | 1: 0.82
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {5.5.7       |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.6.7.6.9   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   16   |  771- 780 | 7.7.7.8      | 3            | 6            | 4.5          | 5.7          | 2            | 3.4          | {7.7.5.5     | 3            | (5.6.8.5     | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.6.6.8     |              | {3.7         |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.6.7.2     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  781- 790 | 7.8          | 3            | {4.5.4.3     | {4.6.4.4     | {4.4.6.8     | 2            | 3.4          | {3.4.4.4     | 3            | 6.7          | 3 | 7 | 7 |13 | 1: 1.86
        |           |              |              | {2.6         | {1.4.3.5     | {5.7         |              |              | {9.9.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   17   |  791- 800 | 7.8          | 2.3          | 6            | {4.4.4.3.6   | 4.8.4.6.7    | 2            | 4            | {5.7.6.6.1   | 3            | 5.7          | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {2.4.2.5     |              |              |              | {7.4.4.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              | {2.4.4.4.2   |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  801- 810 | 7.8          | {4.2.4.1.4   | 5.7.6        | 5            | 5.7          | 2            | 3.5.5.4      | 6.8          | {2.4.4.2     | 6.8.7        | 2 | 8 | 6 |14 | 1: 2.33
        |           |              | {2.4.3       |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.2.4 3     |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   19   |  811- 820 | 7.9.7.8      | 2.4.2.4.3    | 5.7.6        | 3.6.4.6.5    | 7            | 2            | 3.5.4        | 6.8          | 4.4.3        | 6.8.7        | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  821- 830 | 7.8          | 2.4.4.3      | 6            | 4.6.6.6.5    | 6.8.7        | 2            | 3.5.5.5.4    | 6.8          | 2.4.3        | 6.5.7        | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  831- 840 | 7.9.8        | 2.4.4.2.4.3  | 7.6          | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.6.4.6.8    | 2.4.3        | 6.8.7        | 4 | 6 | 8 |22 | 1: 2.75
   20   |  841- 850 | 7.8          | 3            | 5.7.6        | 4.6.5        | 6.8.7        | 2            | 3.5.4        | 3.5.8        | 2.4.3        | 6.8.6.8.7    | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   |  851- 860 | 8            | 2.4.3        | 6            | 3.6.5        | 5.7          | 2            | 2.5.4        | 4.7.8        | 2.4.3        | 4.4.6.7      | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   |  861- 870 | 7.8          | 2.4.3        | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 2.4          | 6.8          | 2.4.3        | 4.7          | 4 | 6 | 9 |21 | 1: 2.33
   21   |  871- 880 | 7.9.8        | 2.4.3        | 5.7.6        | {4.6.4.6     | 4.6.7        | 2            | 3.5.3.5.4    | 5.7.8        | 2.4.3        | 5.7          | 1 | 9 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {3.2.4.5     |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  881- 890 | 7.8          | 2.4.2.3      | 3.5.7.6      | 3.4.6.4.6.5  | 4.6.5.6.7    | 2            | 4            | 6.8          | 3            | 4.6.5.7      | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  891- 900 | 7.8          | 2.4.3        | 5.7.6        | 4.5          | 5.7          | 3.3.3.2      | 4            | {4.6.5.7.6   | 2.4.3        | 5.7          | 1 | 9 | 5 |25 | 1: 5.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {4.2.4.8     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   22   |  901- 910 | 7.8          | 2.4.3        | 5.7.6        | 4.6.5        | 6.8.7        | 2            | 2.5.4        | 5.6.8        | 2.3          | 6.7          | 1 | 9 |   |   |
    "   |  911- 920 | 7.8          | 2.3          | 5.6          | 4.5          | 5.7          | 2            | 3.4          | 4.6.8        | 2.3          | 5.6.7        | 1 | 9 | 2 |18 | 1: 9.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   23   |  921- 930 | 7.8          | 2.3          | {3.2.4.4     | 5            | 4.6.5.6.7    | 2            | 3.2.4        | 5.4.6.8      | 2.3          | {4.5.4.3.5   | 2 | 8 |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {5.6         |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.5.6.7     |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   23   |  931- 940 | 7.9.7.8      | 3            | 5.4.6        | 5            | 5.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 6.8.7        | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   |  941- 950 | 7.8          | 3            | 5.6          | 4.6.5        | 7            | 2            | 3.5.4        | 5.6.8        | 2.3          | 6.7          | 3 | 7 |10 |20 | 1: 2.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   24   |  951- 960 | 7.8          | 2.3          | {2.7.7.4     | 4.6.5        | 5.7          | 2            | 4            | 4.6.8        | 3            | 6.8.7        | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {5.7.4.6     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  961- 970 | 7.9.7.8      | 3            | 6            | 5            | (6.8.6.8     | 2            | 5.5.3.4      | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
        |           |              |              |              |              | {6.7         |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {4.2.6.4     |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   26   |  971- 980 | 7.9.7.8      | 3            | 6            | {6.4.6.4     | 7            | 2            | 4            | 6.8          | 3            | 6.8.7        | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              | {6.1.5       |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  981- 990 | 7.9.7.8      | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.6.8        | 3            | 6.8.7        | 7 | 3 |   |   |
        |  991-1000 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.8.5.7      | 2            | 4            | 6.8          | 4.2.3        | 6.5.7        | 5 | 5 |18 |12 | 1: 0.67
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
     In |trials 1001| to 1100 the  | right door   |was indicated | by being     |raised before | the choice   | was made.    |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
   30   | 1101-1110 | 8            | 4.3          | 7.6          | 6.6.5        | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | {7.7.7.7.7   | 3            | 6.6.7        | 4 | 6 | 4 | 6 | 1: 1.50
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.6.6.7.8   |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {7.7.6.7     |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   31   | 1111-1120 | 7.7.8        | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 6.7          | 3.3.2        | 4            | {7.6.6.7     | 4.4.4.3      | 7            | 4 | 6 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              | {6.6.8*      |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 1121-1130 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 8.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 4 | 6 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
 August |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    2   | 1131-1140 | 8            | 4.4.3        | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.3.3.2      | 4            | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   | 1141-1150 | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 7.6          | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 4.3          | 7            | 3 | 7 | 9 |11 | 1: 1.22
    3   | 1151-1160 | 7.9.8        | 4.3          | 7.6          | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 5.4          | 7.6.7.8      | 4.3          | 6.7          | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   | 1161-1170 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 7            | 6 | 4 | 8 |12 | 1: 1.50
    4   | 1171-1180 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 6.7          | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 4.3          | 6.5.6.7      | 2 | 8 |   |   |
    "   | 1181-1190 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.3.2        | 4            | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |10 |10 | 1: 1.00
    5   | 1191-1200 | 7.8          | 4.4.3        | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 3.3.3.2      | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
        | 1201-1210 | 8            | 4.3          | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 1211-1220 | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6.5        | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 7.7.6.7.8    | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |17 |13 | 1: 0.76
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    6   | 1221-1230 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | {6.5.6.6     | 2            | 4            | {5.6.5.7     | 3            | 6.8.6.7      | 7 | 3 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              | {5.6.5.7     |              |              | {9.7.8       |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   | 1231-1240 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 4.5          | 7            | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |13 | 7 | 1: 0.54
    7   | 1241-1250 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 4            | 8            | 3            | 8.7          | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   | 1251-1260 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 6.5          | 7            | 3.2          | 5.4          | 8            | 3            | 7            | 7 | 3 |   |   |
    "   | 1261-1270 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 5.3.4        | 8            | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |23 | 7 | 1: 0.30
    9   | 1271-1280 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 2            | 5.4          | 9.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |   |   |
    "   | 1281-1290 | 8            | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | 7.8          | 3            | 7            | 8 | 2 |16 | 4 | 1: 0.25
   10   | 1291-1300 | 7.8          | 3            | 7.6          | 5            | 6.7          | 3.2          | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 5 | 5 |   |   |
    "   | 1301-1310 | 7.8          | 4.3          | 5.6          | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.8          | 3            | 6.8.7        | 3 | 7 |   |   |
    "   | 1311-1320 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 5.7          | 2            | 4            | 5.7.8        | 3            | 4.6.8.7      | 6 | 4 |14 |16 | 1: 1.14
   11   | 1321-1330 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 3.2          | 4            | 4.6.7.8      | 2.3          | 5.7          | 4 | 6 |   |   |
    "   | 1331-1340 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 7            | 6 | 4 |10 |10 | 1: 1.00
   12   | 1341-1350 | 9.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |   |   |
    "   | 1351-1360 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 7.8          | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |12 | 8 | 1: 0.67
   19   | 1361-1370 | 7.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 6.7          | 2            | 4            | 6.7.8        | 3            | 6.7          | 6 | 4 |   |   |
        | 1371-1380 | 9.8          | 3            | 6            | 5            | 7            | 3.2          | 4            | 7.9.8        | 3            | 6.8.7        | 6 | 4 |12 | 8 | 1: 0.67
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========

[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]



After two hundred and fifty trials on problem 2 had been given Julius,
it seemed desirable to introduce a radical change in method in order to
stimulate him to maximal effort. It was therefore decided to force him
to make a round trip through the apparatus in connection with each
choice, and to let this forced labor serve, in the place of confinement,
as punishment for mistakes. This new method yielded peculiar and
characteristic results. They differ from those previously obtained
largely because of the orang utan's remarkably strong tendency to
reenter the box through which he had just passed. This occurred so
persistently, as may be seen in table 9 (June 17, second series, June
18, etc.), that a further modification of method was introduced in that
after the same wrong box had been entered five times in succession, the
experimenter on the next choice of the box confined the animal for a
stated interval, say sixty seconds, in it, and then allowed it to escape
by way of the exit door and choose repeatedly until it finally located
the right box. Were it not for this particular feature of the method,
the number of choices recorded after June 17 would unquestionably be
very much greater than the table indicates.

The new method proved a severe test of the orang utan's patience and
perseverance, for he had to work much harder than formerly for his
reward, and often became much fatigued before completing the regular
series of ten trials. Early in the use of this method, he developed the
habit of rolling around from exit door to starting point by a series of
somersaults. When especially discouraged he would often bump his head
against the floor so hard that I could hear the dull thud. As has been
noted, I found it desirable to vary the procedure repeatedly. It proved
especially interesting to give one series per day with the round trip as
punishment and another series with confinement as punishment.

Day after day, as the experiment progressed, slight or great
fluctuations of the ratios of right to wrong choices appeared, but
without consistent improvement. There was, to be sure, as the last
column of table 9 shows, a radical improvement during the first six
hundred and fifty trials, for the number of right choices per series
increased from 0 to 8. But, as the observations were continued from day
to day, it became more and more evident that the animal was merely
passing from tendency to tendency--method to method--mixing tendencies,
and occasionally developing new ones, without approach to the solution
of the problem. This fact would have led me to discontinue the work much
earlier than I actually did had it not been for the peculiarity of the
results obtained with problem 1. It seemed not improbable that at any
time Julius might succeed in perfectly solving this problem over night
precisely as he had solved the first problem.

A curiously interesting bit of behavior appeared for the first time on
June 29. Julius had gone to the first box at the right end of the group,
and instead of entering, he had wheeled around toward his right, and
turning a complete circle, faced the right box, which he promptly
entered. Subsequently, the tendency developed and the method was used
with increasing frequency. On June 30, it appeared in the first series,
four times, in the second series, six times; on July 1, in the first
series, three times, and in the second series, four times; on July 2, in
the first series, five times, and in the second series, nine times. It
was indeed only by accident that the animal failed to fulfill the
technical requirement for perfect solution of the problem in this
series. Yet, had he done so, his subsequent trials would doubtless have
revealed the lack of any other idea than that of turning completely
around before entering a box.

This odd bit of behavior proved peculiarly interesting and significant
in that the tendency to turn became dissociated from the position (in
front of the first box at the right end of the group) in connection with
which it originally developed. After a few days, Julius would enter the
reaction-chamber and instead of proceeding directly to the right end of
the group, would stop suddenly wherever he happened to be, turn toward
his right in a complete circle, and hasten into the box nearest to him
which, as often as not, proved to be the wrong one. Thus the idea of
turning completely about, which had it continued its association with
the idea of facing the first box at the right, would have yielded
success, instead became useless because of its dissociation. That the
orang utan is capable of using free ideas seems clear enough in the
light of this behavior. That he proved incapable of getting the idea of
second from the right end is as clearly shown by the detailed results of
table 9,--the fruits of weeks of experimenting.

Certain other interesting tricks developed in Julius's behavior. Thus,
on July 5, there appeared the tendency to move as though about to enter
the right box (feint), then to stop suddenly and promptly enter another
box, which was, of course, a wrong one. The reason for the development
of this tendency could not be discovered, but in connection with it,
there appeared another tendency which possibly can be explained. Julius
took to backing into the chosen box so that he could face the
experimenter. He would then, after a period of hesitation, come out and
promptly enter one of the other boxes. This tendency was apparently due
to the fact that during one or two series the experimenter growled at
the orang utan every time he made a mistake. The growl startled him and
caused him to look around. He evidently felt the need of keeping his
eyes on the experimenter,--Hence the backing into the open box. The
tendency disappeared shortly after the experimenter gave up the use of
the growl as a method of punishing the animal for what were suspected to
be careless choices.

Curiously enough, it was not until July 10 that direct choice of the
right box was made at all frequently. Previously, selection of it had
been made almost invariably after approach to other boxes. But in the
second series for July 10 there was an extraordinary improvement in
method. This developed in the presence of two visitors, and it is
therefore all the more surprising. The choices were made not only
directly, but with decision and evident certainty that was quite at
variance with the previous behavior of the animal.

All the while through variation of methods, I was seeking to discover
the best means of holding the orang utan to his maximum effort and care
in attempting to select the right box. One day it would seem as though
forcing him to make round trips with rewards only for correct first
choices proved most satisfactory, and the next it might seem equally
clear that punishment by confinement for thirty seconds or sixty
seconds, with reward for correct choice in every trial, yielded better
results. In the end I had to admit that no best method had been
demonstrated and that I had failed to develop conditions which served to
compel the animal's attention to the problem and to lead him to work
without discouragement. There were, it is true, days on which it seemed
practically certain that the problem would be solved, but as it turned
out, Julius never succeeded in choosing correctly--throughout a series
of ten trials.

As a last resort, in order to make perfectly sure that the orang utan
was doing his best, I decided to introduce corporal punishment in a mild
form. For this purpose, I placed my assistant in charge of the apparatus
and the series of trials, and stationed myself in one corner of the
reaction-chamber with a whip in my hand. Whenever Julius entered a wrong
box, I approached him with the whip and struck at him, being careful not
to injure him and rarely striking him at all, for the threat was more
effective than a blow. He was extremely afraid of the whip and would
begin to whine and attempt to get out of the way as soon as he saw it.

This method was introduced on August 10, but no improvement resulted,
and in the end there was no reason to consider it more satisfactory than
the other procedures. I am now wholly convinced that Julius did his best
to choose correctly in the majority of the numerous series which were
given him in connection with problem 2.

From trials 1001 to 1100, a radical departure from the previous methods
was introduced in that the right box was indicated to the animal by the
slight and momentary raising of its exit door. Of course no records of
the choices for this group of one hundred trials appear in table 9, for
the simple reason that the animal inevitably and immediately entered the
right box. It was thought that this method might serve to break up the
previously developed tendencies toward inadequate forms of response and
so encourage the animal that he would later solve the problem when given
opportunity to select the right box without aid from the experimenter.
But as a matter of fact, while the ratio of right to wrong first choices
was 1 to .67 in the series preceding this change of method, it was 1 to
1.50 in the first series following its use. There is no satisfactory
evidence that Julius profited by this experience, though as a matter of
fact he did succeed in making his best daily record, eight right to two
wrong choices, on August 4, after 1190 trials.

The curve of learning for this problem has been plotted and is presented
in figure 19. It is of course incomplete and it is offered only to
indicate the extreme irregularity in performance.


_Problem 1a. First at the Right End_

It was decided on August 19 that the further continuation of the work of
Julius on problem 2 was not worth while. He had become much discouraged,
and although willing to work for food, gave no indications whatever of
improvement and seemed to have exhausted his methods. It seemed wise
instead of giving up work with him in the multiple-choice method to
return to a form of problem 1. We may designate it as problem 1a. The
right box is definable as the first at the right end of the series
instead of the first at the left end as in the original problem 1. It
was thought possible that Julius might quickly solve this problem by a
process similar to that used for problem 1.

Work was begun on problem 1a, August 20, and for six successive days two
series of trials per day were given, the settings for which as well as
the resulting choices are given in table 10. Most notable in these
results is the large number of cases in which Julius chose first the
second box from the right end of the series, or in other words that box
which had been the right one in problem 2. Contrary to expectation, he
showed no inclination to abandon this tendency to choose the second from
the right end, and the ratio of right to wrong choices changed in the
direction opposite from expectation, beginning with 1 to 4 and ending on
the sixth day with 0 to 20.

It was obviously useless to continue the experiment further since Julius
had given up his attempts to locate the right box in the first choice
and was apparently satisfied to discover it by a process of trial and
error. He had, it would seem, satisfied himself that the problem was
insoluble. These results obtained in problem 1a constitute a most
interesting comment on the effects of problem 2 on the orang utan.
Behavior similar to that which he developed well might have been
obtained from a child of three to four years placed in a like situation
and forced to strive, day after day, to solve a problem beyond its
ideational capacity.

In many respects the most interesting and to the experimenter the most
surprising result of this long series of observations with Julius was
the lack of consistent improvement. It seemed almost incredible that he
should continue, day after day, to make incorrect choices in a
particular setting while choosing correctly in some other setting which
from the standpoint of the experimenter was not more difficult.



TABLE 10

Results for Orang utan in problem 1a


========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========
        |    No.    |     S.1      |     S.2      |     S.3      |     S.4      |     S.5      |     S.6      |     S.7      |     S.8      |     S.9      |     S.10     |   |   |   |   | Ratio
  Date  |    of     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   1.2.3.4    | R | W | R | W |   of
        |  trials   |     5.63     |   1.2.3.4    |   6.7.8.9    |   2.3.4.5    |  3.4.5.6.7   |    1.2.3     |   5.6.7.8    |     1.2      |  2.3.4.5.6   |    5.6.7     |   |   |   |   | R to W
--------+-----------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---+---+---+---+--------
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
 August |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   20   |    1- 10  | 6            | 3.4          | 6.7.8.9      | 4.5          | 6.7          | 3            | 7.8          | 2            | 5.5.6        | 6.7          | 3 | 7 |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |   11- 20  | 5.6          | 3.4          | {7.8.7.8     | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2.3          | {7.6.7.7     | 2            | 5.6          | 6.7          | 1 | 9 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
        |           |              |              | {8.7.8.9     |              |              |              | {6.7.7.8     |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   21   |   21- 30  | 5.6          | 3.4          | {7.8.7.6     | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2.3          | 7.8          | 2            | 5.6          | 5.7          | 1 | 9 |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {8.7.9       |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |   31- 40  | 5.6          | 3.4          | 7.7.6.8.9    | 4.5          | 6.7          | 3            | 6.7.8        | 2            | 6            | 6.7          | 3 | 7 | 4 |16 | 1: 4.00
   23   |   41- 50  | 5.6          | 3.4          | 7.8.9        | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2.3          | 6.7.8        | 2            | 5.6          | 5.6.7        | 1 | 9 |   |   |
    "   |   51- 60  | 5.6          | 3.4          | 7.8.9        | 4.5          | 6.7          | 2.3          | 6.8          | 2            | 5.6          | 6.7          | 1 | 9 | 2 |18 | 1: 9.00
   24   |   61- 70  | 5.6          | 3.4          | 6.8.9        | 4.5          | 5.7          | 2.3          | 6.7.8        | 1.2          | 5.6          | 6.7          | 0 |10 |   |   |
    "   |   71- 80  | 5.6          | 3.4          | 6.7.8.9      | 4.5          | 5.7          | 2.3          | 5.7.8        | 2            | 5.6          | 6.7          | 1 | 9 | 1 |19 | 1:19.00
   25   |   81- 90  | 5.6          | 3.4          | 6.7.8.9      | 5            | 5.6.7        | 2.3          | 7.8          | 1.2          | 5.6          | 4.5.6.7      | 1 | 9 |   |   |
    "   |   91-100  | 5.6          | 3.4          | 6.7.8.9      | 3.4.5        | 6.6.7        | 2.3          | 6.7.8        | 1.2          | 5.6          | 6.7          | 0 |10 | 1 |19 | 1:19.00
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
   26   |  101-110  | 5.6          | 3.4          | {6.7.8.8     | 3.5          | 5.6.7        | 2.3          | 5.6.7.6.7.8  | 1.2          | 5.6          | 6.7          | 0 |10 |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {6.7.6.9     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              | {6.7.8.8     |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
    "   |  111-120  | 5.6          | 2.3.4        | {6.7.8.7     | 3.4.5        | 5.6.7        | 2.3          | 7.8          | 1.2          | 5.6          | 4.5.6.7      | 0 |10 | 0 |20 | 0:20.00
        |           |              |              | {6.7.9*      |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
        |           |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |              |   |   |   |   |
========+===========+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+===+===+===+===+========


[Footnote *: Aided by experimenter.]



The evidence suggests that in this young orang utan ideational learning
tended to replace the simpler mode of problem solution by trial and
error. Seemingly incapable of solving his problems by the lower grade
process, he strove persistently, and often vainly, to gain insight. He
used ideas ineffectively. Animals far lower in intelligence (e.g., the
pig), surpass him in ability to solve these relational problems because
they use the method of elimination by trial consistently and
effectively. Julius, in these experiments, made a poor showing because
his substitute for trial and error is only slightly developed. Would he
have succeeded better with the same problems if mentally mature?

There are many important features of the results which, for lack of
space, have not been indicated or discussed. They can be developed from
later comparative studies of the data, for in the tables appear all of
the essential facts of response apart from those mentioned in the text.



IV

RESULTS OF SUPPLEMENTARY TESTS OF IDEATIONAL BEHAVIOR


1. Julius, _Pongo pygmaeus_


_Box Stacking Experiment_

In addition to the multiple-choice experiments which have been described
in detail in the previous section, it was possible to conduct certain
less systematic tests of ideational behavior in the monkeys and the
orang utan. From the technical standpoint these tests were relatively
unsatisfactory because only inexactly describable. But their results are
in many respects more interesting, if not also more important, in the
light which they throw on ideation than are those previously presented.
First, in order of time, comes a test which may be designated as the box
stacking experiment. The method will now be described in connection with
an account of the behavior of Julius as contrasted with that of a child
of three years and four months of age.

In the large central cage labelled Z, figure 12, which was twenty-four
feet long, ten feet wide, and ten to twelve feet deep, the following
situation was arranged. From the center of the wire covering of the
cage, a banana was suspended on a string so that it was approximately
six feet from the floor, five feet from either side of the cage, and
twelve feet from either end. From all approaches it was far beyond the
reach of Julius, since it was impossible for him to climb along the wire
roof and thus reach the string. Two boxes were placed on the floor of
the cage several feet from the point directly under the banana. The one
of these boxes was heavy and irregular in shape, as is shown in figures
21, 23 and 24 of plate V. Its greatest height was twenty-one inches; its
least height, eighteen inches; its other dimensions, twelve and sixteen
inches respectively. The smaller and lighter box measured twenty-two by
twelve by ten inches. According to the experimenter's calculations, the
only way in which Julius could obtain the banana was by placing the
smaller box upon the larger and then climbing upon them.

At 10 a.m. on March 5, Julius was admitted to the large cage, and the
banana was pointed out to him by the experimenter. He immediately set
about trying to get it, and worked diligently during the whole of the
period of observation, which, because of the unfinished condition of
some of the cages, was limited to slightly over ten minutes. Within this
period he made upward of a dozen fairly well directed attempts to obtain
the food. Chief among them were three attempts to reach the banana from
different positions on the left wall of the cage (as the experimenter
faced the laboratory); two attempts to reach it from different positions
on the right wall; two from the large box in positions nearly under the
banana; two from the large box with the aid of the experimenter's hand;
and one from the distant end of the cage(?). There occurred, also, less
definite and easily describable efforts to get at the reward.

On account of the unfinished condition of the cages, the experimenter
had to remain in the large cage with Julius during the test. This
interfered with the experiment because the animal tended both to try to
escape and to get the experimenter to help him with his task.
Particularly interesting is the latter sort of behavior. After the orang
utan had made two or three futile attempts to obtain the food he came to
the experimenter, who was standing in one corner of the cage, took him
by the hand, and led him to a point directly under the banana. He then
looked up toward the banana, grasped the experimenter's arm, raised it,
and then tried to pull himself up. He was not allowed to get the food by
climbing up on the experimenter. A few minutes later, he again led the
experimenter toward the banana, but receiving discouragement in this
activity, he proceeded to devote himself to other methods.

Apart from the distractions which have been mentioned above, Julius's
attention to the food was surprisingly constant. Whatever his position
with respect to it, he seemed not for an instant to lose his motive, and
to whatever part of the cage he went and whatever he did during the
interval of observation was evidently guided by the strong desire to
obtain the banana. Frequently he would look directly at it for a few
seconds and then try some new method of reaching it. His gaze was
deliberate and in the handling of the boxes he accurately gauged
distances. Several times he succeeded in placing the larger box almost
directly under the banana, and repeatedly he located that portion of the
side wall from which he could most nearly reach the coveted prize.



EXPLANATION OF PLATE V

Orang utan, Julius, obtaining banana by piling boxes
or by using pole

FIGURE 21.--Julius in act of setting larger box on end.

FIGURE 22.--Placing smaller box on larger.

FIGURE 23.--Balancing on larger box preparatory to reaching for banana.

FIGURE 24.--Balancing and reaching to the utmost.

FIGURE 25.--Standing on three boxes (after stacking them) and
reaching for reward.

FIGURE 26.--Lifting smaller box up toward banana.

FIGURE 27.--The act of stacking the boxes.

FIGURE 28.--Sequel to figure 27.

FIGURE 29.--Box and pole experiment. Pushing the second pole
into the box.

FIGURE 30.--Pushing pole into box.

FIGURE 31.--Enjoying the reward of success.



From my notes I quote the following comment on the results of the
initial experiment: "Despite all that has been written concerning the
intelligent behavior of the orang utan, I was amazed by Julius's
behavior this morning, for it was far more deliberate and apparently
reflective as well as more persistently directed toward the goal than I
had anticipated. I had looked for sporadic attempts to obtain the
banana, with speedy discouragement and such fluctuations of attention as
would be exhibited by a child of two to four years. But in less than ten
minutes Julius made at least ten obvious and well directed attempts to
reach the food. There were also wanderings, efforts to obtain aid from
the experimenter, and varied attempts to escape from the cage."

Before proceeding further with the description of the behavior of Julius
in the box stacking test, I shall describe for contrast the behavior of
a boy three years four months of age when confronted with a situation
practically identical with that which the ape was given an opportunity
to meet. For the child, the banana was suspended, as previously
described, from the roof of the cage. The same two boxes were placed on
the floor at considerable distances from the banana, and in addition, a
light stick, about six feet long, and a piece of board, the latter by
accident, were on the floor. The child was asked to get the banana for
Julius, and he eagerly and confidently volunteered to do so.

His behavior may best be described by enumeration of the several
attempts made. They include (1) placing the larger box nearly under the
banana and reaching from it. (2) Standing of the larger box on end with
resulting failure because the child could not stand on the sloping edges
of the top of the box. (3) The larger box was turned on its side and the
lighter box drawn up opposite it and stood on end. The child then
mounted the larger box and from it stepped to the top of the smaller.
But the boxes had not been placed beneath the banana, and when the child
reached for it, he found himself several feet away from his prize. (4)
The boxes were moved to a position nearly under the banana and another
futile attempt was made to reach it without placing the smaller box on
top of the larger one, the only position from which the child could
readily obtain it. (5) The piece of board was placed on top of the
larger box and from this height the child again reached upward. (6) The
six-foot stick was taken up and an attempt was made to strike the banana
and thus dislodge it, but it was too securely fastened to be obtained
thus. (7) Attention shifted to other things, and the child played for a
time with the board. Reminded of the banana by the experimenter, he
again tried method (3). (8) He again used the stick on the banana. (9)
The effort to knock the prize to the floor having failed, he became
discouraged and said that he must go home. (10) When told that Julius
was very hungry and wanted the banana, he repeated efforts similar to
those described in (3) and (6).

Up to this time the observations had covered a period of twenty minutes.
The child was now taken from the cage and allowed to play about for
fifteen minutes. Asked then whether he would go back and try to get the
banana, he replied, "No, 'cause I don't want to get it," thus indicating
his discouragement with the situation. When taken into the cage, he,
nevertheless, made the additional attempts indicated below: (11) Use of
one of the boxes. (12) He remarked, "Now I know, I'll get it," and after
so saying, repeated (3). (13) Failing, he turned to me and said, "I
could get it if I was on your head," but he did not, as Julius had done,
lead me to the proper place and try to reach the banana by climbing up
or by urging me to lift him. (14) Later, he played in the boxes,
apparently forgetful of his task. Finally he remarked: "I'll get the
banana," but he made no attempt to do so, and instead, watched the
monkeys intently. Thereafter, he showed no further interest in the
solution of the problem, and the experiment, after a total period of
fifty-five minutes, was discontinued.

Comparison of the behavior of the ape with that of the child indicates a
greater variety of ideas for the latter. Julius gauged his distances
much more accurately than the child, attended more steadily, and worked
more persistently to obtain the reward, but he did not so nearly
approach the idea of stacking the boxes as did the child, for the
latter, in placing the board on one of the boxes, exhibited in
ineffective form the idea which should have yielded the solution of the
problem.

The child was given no further opportunity to work at the problem,
whereas Julius, as I shall now describe, continued his efforts on
subsequent days under somewhat different conditions. On Wednesday, March
10, the banana was suspended as formerly, and three boxes, all of them
small and light enough to be readily handled by the ape, were placed in
distant parts of the cage. The six-foot stick which had been present in
the test with the child, but not in the first test with Julius, was also
placed in the cage.

Julius was allowed to work for about an hour. As formerly, he was
sufficiently hungry to be eager to get the food and evidently tried all
of the possible ways which occurred to him. Chief among these were (1)
the use of the various boxes separately or in pairs in very varied
positions but never with one upon another,--the only way in which the
banana could be reached; (2) climbing to various points on the sides of
the cage, with infrequent attempts to reach the banana. Usually his eyes
saved him the vain effort.

Unlike the child, Julius paid little attention to the six-foot stick.
Two or three times he took it up and seemingly reached for the banana,
but in no case did he try persistently to strike it and knock it from
the string. It is but fair, however, to remark that such an act is very
difficult for the young orang utan, as compared with the child, because
of the weakness of the legs and the awkwardness of striking from a
sitting posture. As previously, the steadiness of attention and the
persistence of effort toward the end in view were most surprising. At
one time Julius walked to the end of the cage and there happened to see
one of the monkeys eating. He watched intently a few seconds and then
hastened back to the banana as if his task had been suggested to him by
the sight of the feeding animal. Most interesting and significant in
this behavior was the suddenness with which he would turn to a new
method. It often looked precisely as though a new idea had come to him,
and he was all eagerness to try it out.

On March 11, Julius was given another opportunity to obtain the banana
by the use of the three boxes. Although he used them together he made no
effort to place one upon another. Certain of his methods are shown in
plate V, especially by figures 21, 23 and 24.

This experiment was continued on April 2 under yet different conditions,
for this time only two boxes were placed in the cage, the one of them
the heavy, irregularly-shaped box and the other the smaller, lighter one
originally used. On the end of the heavier box had been nailed a two by
two inch wooden block in order to increase the difficulty in using this
box alone. As previously, Julius made varied attempts to obtain the
banana, but on the whole his interest and attention seemed somewhat
weaker than previously and there were indications of discouragement
because of repeated failures.

He handled the boxes conspicuously well, and it seemed at times that he
would certainly succeed in placing the one upon the other and in
reaching the food.

After one series of attempts from the sides of the cage and from the
large box, he deliberately turned away from the box and neatly executed
a somersault on the floor of the cage, as much as to say, "I am
disgusted with the whole situation." Again, later on the same day, after
falling from the top of the larger box, which tilted over very easily,
he rolled himself into a ball, and childlike, played with his feet. An
additional evidence of his changed affective attitude toward his task,
especially in connection with definite failures, appeared in his rough
handling and biting of the boxes. When most impatient, he worked very
roughly.

Julius was allowed to work for the reward from thirty to ninety minutes,
or, as a rule, until he had become completely discouraged on April 3, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9 and 13. His behavior was interesting and significant, but
nothing new appeared except that his willingness to work gradually
disappeared, and on April 13, although previously hungry, he made only a
single attempt to obtain the banana and then paid no further attention
to it.

The prolonged and varied efforts to obtain the banana were due in a
measure at least to three accidental successes. Thus on April 2, 3 and
again on the 5th, by fortunate combinations of circumstances, he
succeeded in getting the banana, contrary to the intention of the
experimenter.

Although active at first on April 6, he soon wearied of his task and
quit work. The same was true on April 7, and again on the 8th and 9th.
On these days, although hungry, he did not care to enter the large cage
and worked only a few minutes each day, seldom making more than two or
three half-hearted attempts to obtain the banana. His attitude toward
the task had changed completely, in that hopelessness had taken the
place of eager expectancy. By the 13th of April he had so nearly given
up voluntary efforts to solve the problem that it seemed worth while to
test his ability to get the idea by watching the experimenter. For this
purpose the following test of imitation was made.

On the morning of April 14, having placed a banana in the usual
position, I took Julius into the large cage, dragged the two boxes to
the proper position beneath the banana, placed the smaller one upon the
larger one and then climbed up on them to show the ape that I could
reach the banana. I then stepped down and gave him a chance to climb on
the boxes. He did so immediately and obtained the food.

Another piece of banana was supplied, the boxes were placed in distant
corners of the cage, and fifteen minutes were allowed Julius so to place
them that he could obtain his reward. He gave no indications of having
profited by my demonstration, but worked with the boxes singly, usually
with the larger one. On April 16, with the banana in position and the
two boxes also in the cage, Julius was admitted and allowed to work for
five minutes, but again without success. I then placed the boxes
properly for him and he immediately climbed up and got the banana. While
he was eating, the boxes were carried to distant corners of the cage and
another banana placed in position. Now thirty minutes were allowed him
for unaided work on the problem. As formerly, the larger box was used
repeatedly and attempts to reach from the side of the cage appeared, but
there was no tendency to try to use the two boxes together. He worked
fairly persistently, however, and showed clearly the stimulating and
encouraging effect of aid from the experimenter. Once more, on April 17,
Julius was taken into the cage and allowed to watch me place the boxes
in proper position. He then climbed up and obtained the desired food.
After the bait had been renewed and the boxes displaced, he immediately
tried to use the larger one, then he reached for the small one as though
to use both together. But the impulse died out and he turned again to
the larger box as usual, standing it on end, and persistently trying to
balance himself on it. Nothing else of special interest happened during
the interval of unaided effort.

Similarly, I placed the boxes for the ape on April 19, allowed him to
get the banana and then gave him opportunity to try for himself after
the boxes had been displaced. This time he immediately reached for the
smaller box and moved it about a little, thus indicating a new
association. He next turned to the larger box and worked with it
persistently. Later, he once more worked with the smaller box in an
unusual manner. He repeatedly stood on it, but made no attempt to lift
it or to place it on the larger box. Clearly the usually neglected
smaller box had become associated with the satisfaction of obtaining the
banana. The same method was carried out on April 20. As I placed the
boxes in position beneath the banana, Julius watched with unusual
intentness, and when it came his turn to try to obtain the food by the
use of the boxes, he began at once to work with the smaller box, but as
on April 19, he soon abandoned it and turned to the other. While I was
making note of this particular feature of his behavior, he suddenly
seized the smaller box by two corners with his hands and by one edge
with his teeth, and after a few attempts placed it on top of the larger
box, climbed up, and obtained the banana.

Because of bad weather on April 21, the next test was made on April 22,
with everything as usual. Unaided, the ape was given an opportunity to
obtain the coveted reward, while I stood ready to obtain records of his
behavior with my camera. He wasted no time, but piled the smaller box on
top of the larger one immediately, and obtained his reward. As soon as
opportunity was offered, he repeated the performance. The same thing
happened on April 23 and several succeeding dates.

Julius had got the idea, and the only further improvement possible was
in skill in manipulating the boxes.

One of the curious performances which appeared during the imitative
period is pictured in figure 26, plate V, where the ape is seen lifting
the smaller box into the air. This he did three or four times one day,
raising it toward the banana each time as though he expected thus to
obtain the reward. As he did not go up with the box (according to his
expectation?), he abandoned this method, and looking about, discovered
the larger box in a distant corner. Thereupon, he promptly pulled the
boxes to their proper position beneath the banana, stacked them, and
obtained his food.

After considerable skill had been acquired in the placing of the boxes,
the one upon the other, the height of the banana above the floor was
increased so that three boxes were necessary. Figure 25 of plate V shows
him standing on three boxes and reaching upward, and figures 22, 27 and
28 show various modes of handling the boxes and of reaching from them.
He was not at all particular as to the stability of his perch, and often
mounted the boxes when it seemed to the experimenter inevitable that
they should topple over and precipitate him to the floor. Only once,
however, during the several days of experimentation did he thus fall.

Obviously important is the evident change in the animal's attention on
April 20. He watched with a keenness of interest which betokened a
dawning idea. Before he had succeeded in stacking the boxes, I had
written in my note-book, "He seemed much interested today, in my placing
of the boxes." Interesting, and important also, is the ease and
efficiency with which he met the situation time after time, after this
first success. "Trial and error" had no obvious part in the development
of the really essential features of the behavior. The ape had the idea
and upon it depended for guidance.

Except for the fact that Julius was immature, probably under five years
of age, it is likely that he would have stacked the boxes spontaneously
instead of by suggestion from the experimenter or imitatively.

No unprejudiced psychologist would be likely to interpret the activities
of the orang utan in the box-stacking experiment as other than imaginal
or ideational. He went directly, and in the most business-like way from
point to point, from method to method, trying in turn and more or less
persistently or repeatedly, almost all of the possible ways of obtaining
the coveted food. The fact that he did not happen upon the only certain
road to success is surprising indeed in view of the many ineffective
methods which he used. It seemed almost as though he avoided the easy
method.

It is especially important, in connection with these results, to point
out the risk of misinterpretation of observations on the anthropoid
apes. If they can imitate human activities as readily and effectively as
Julius did in this particular experiment, we can never be sure of the
spontaneity of their ideational behavior unless we definitely know that
they have had no opportunity to see human beings perform similar acts.

Of all the methods of eliciting ideational or allied forms of behavior
used in my study of the monkeys and ape, none yielded such illuminating
results as the box stacking test, and although from the technical
standpoint, it has many shortcomings, as a means to qualitative results
it has proved invaluable.


_Other Methods of Obtaining the Reward_

Some weeks later, I tried to discover how Julius would obtain the much
desired banana when the boxes were absent. I placed in the large cage a
stick about six feet long and an old broom. When admitted, he looked
about for the boxes, but not seeing them, picked up the broom and
placing it with the splints down, beneath the banana, he tried to climb
it, but as it fell over with him, he abandoned this after a few trials,
went to his cage, and picking up some old bags which he used at night as
covers, he dragged them out and placed them on the floor beneath the
banana. He next put the broom upon them and tried to climb up. This
general type of behavior persisted for several minutes, everything
within reach being used as were the bags, as a means of raising him in
the desired direction. Finally, he placed his feet on the broom where
the handle joins the splints, seized the handle near the top with his
hands, drew himself up as far as possible, and then launched himself in
the air and tried to seize the banana. On the third attempt he
succeeded.

Later, he was given a plain stick about five feet long. Figure 32 of
plate VI shows him using this to obtain the banana in the manner
described above. He would grasp it with one or both feet, usually one,
ten to fifteen inches from the floor of the cage, meanwhile holding with
his hands near the top of the stick. He would then, with all his
strength, draw himself up suddenly and jump toward the banana. Often he
came down rather hard on the cement floor, much to his disgust.

Yet another method of obtaining the reward developed a day or two later.
A light red-wood stick about five feet long and an inch in its other
dimensions was the only object in the cage which could possibly be of
use in obtaining the banana. The aim of the experimenter was to discover
whether Julius would use this as a club.

Previously, in connection with the use of the boxes, he had taken up the
same stick two or three times and reached for the banana with it, but in
no case had he struck at it or clearly tried to knock it from the
string, as did the child most readily and naturally. When provided with
this same stick, and it alone, as a means of obtaining the food, he hit
upon the following interesting method. Placing one end of the stick
between a wooden brace and the wire side of the cage, he climbed up to a
level with the banana as is shown in figure 33 of plate VI. Then holding
with one hand and one foot to a timber of the cage and to the stick with
his other foot, he swung outward as far as possible and reached the
banana with his free hand. Having once succeeded by the method, he used
it whenever given an opportunity. It was impossible for him to make the
reach without the use of the small stick, while with it he succeeded
fairly easily and regularly.


_Box and Pole Experiment_

Following the box stacking test, Julius was given an opportunity to
exhibit ideation in another type of experiment. This may be designated
the box and pole test. The conditions are describable thus. A strong
wooden box eighty-four inches long, by four inches wide, by four inches
deep, with open ends, was built with one side hinged. Hasps and padlocks
enabled the experimenter to lock this "lid" after food had been placed
in the center of the box. This box could be placed in the center of the
large cage and there fastened by means of cross bars. It is well shown
in position in figure 29, plate V. Two poles each eight feet long and
approximately one and a half inches in their other dimensions were the
only additional materials in the experiment.

On May 1, Julius was allowed to see the experimenter place a half banana
in this box, close the lid, lock it in position, and securely fasten the
box by means of the cross bars. He was then given opportunity to try to
get the banana. The two poles lay on opposite sides of the box and near
the edges of the cage. Doctor Hamilton and the writer were in the cage
watching. Julius looked into the box through one end, and seeing the
banana, reached for it. He could not obtain it in this way, so he began
to bite at the box and to pull at it with all his strength. During the
fifteen minutes allowed him, he worked at the box in a great variety of
ways, fooling with the locks which had been attached to the hasps as
well as with the cross bars and continually reaching in at the one or
the other end. He was somewhat distracted by the presence of the two
observers and attended rather unsatisfactorily to the task in hand. Not
once did he touch the poles, and it is doubtful whether he even noticed
them. He was not very hungry at this time, and after a few minutes
active work he virtually gave up trying to get the food.

Two days later, on May 3, the box was once more placed in position, this
time with a half banana in the middle and a small piece of banana near
each open end. The two poles lay on the floor of the cage, each several
feet distant from the box. Julius was eager for food. When released he
went immediately to the box, reached in and obtained a piece of banana
from the end nearer the laboratory. He then looked in and saw the piece
near the middle of the box. His next move was to pick up the eight foot
pole and push it into the box, but before pushing it all the way
through, he stopped and began to pull at the box in various ways.
Shortly he returned to the pole and twice thrust it in as far as he
could reach. The first time, after thrusting it all the way through, he
pulled it out and examined the end as though expecting the banana to
come out with it. After a third attempt he looked into the box,
presumably seeing the banana, then turned a backward somersault, came to
the end of the cage, and looked at me. Had it been at all possible, he
would have taken me by the hand and led me to the box as a helper. After
a few seconds, he returned to the pole, pried the lid of the box with
it, then gnawed at the pole. For about five minutes he worked fairly
rapidly and steadily, using the poles, pulling, gnawing, and walking
about.

His next move was to go to the opposite end of the box, look in, take
the piece of banana which was near the opening, then pick up the second
pole, which had not previously been noticed, and after a number of
attempts, push it into and through the box, looking after it and then
pulling it out and looking into the box. Having done this he again came
to my end of the cage, and from there returned to try once more with the
pole which he had first used. He pushed this pole all the way through,
then walked to the other end of the box, looked in and reaching in,
obtained the banana which had been pushed far enough along to be within
his grasp. Figures 29, 30 and 31 of plate V show stages of this process.

Julius had worked twenty-four minutes with relatively little lost time
before succeeding. He had shown almost from the start the idea of using
the pole as an instrument, and his sole difficulty was in making the
pole serve the desired purpose.

The experiment was rendered still more crucial on May 5 by the placing
of the two poles upright in opposite corners of the large cage. For a
few minutes after he entered the cage, Julius did not see them, and his
time was spent pulling and gnawing at the box. Then he discovered one of
the poles, seized it, and pushed it into the box. He tried four times,
then went and got the other pole and pushed it into the opposite end of
the box. Twice he did this, then he returned to the original pole,
bringing the second one with him. He pushed it in beside the first, and
as it happened, shoved the banana out of the opposite end of the box.
But he did not see this, and only after several seconds when he happened
to walk to that end of the box did he discover the banana. The total
time until success was fifteen minutes.

Subsequently the ape became very expert in using the pole to obtain the
banana, and often only a minute or two sufficed for success. It was not
possible for him to direct the stick very accurately, for when he was in
such a position that he could look through the box, he could not work
the stick itself. It was, therefore, always a matter of chance whether
he obtained the banana immediately or only after a number of trials.

Although it is possible that the use of the poles in this experiment was
due to observation of human activities, it seems probable in the light
of what we know of the natural behavior of the anthropoid apes that
Julius would have solved this problem independently of human influence.
It was the expectation of the experimenter that the pole would be used
to push the banana through the box, but as a matter of fact the ape used
it, first of all, to pull the food toward him, thus indicating a natural
tendency which is important in connection with the statements just made.
Subsequently he learned that the banana must be pushed through and
obtained at the farther end of the box. I am not prepared to accept the
solution of this problem as satisfactory evidence of ideation, but I do
know that few observers could have watched the behavior of the orang
utan without being convinced that he was acting ideationally.


_Draw-in Experiment_

An interesting contrast with the box and pole test is furnished by what
may be called the draw-in experiment. This was planned as a simple test
of Julius's ability to use a stick to draw things into his cage from
beyond the wire side. A board was placed, as is shown in figure 34 of
plate VI, with sides to hold a banana, carrot, or some other bit of
food, in position. In the actual test either a carrot or a banana was
placed about two feet from the wire netting and a stick two feet long
was then put into the cage with the ape.

When this situation was first presented to Julius, he looked at the
banana, reached for it, and failing, picked up a bag from the floor of
the cage and tried to push it through the wire mesh toward the banana.
He also used a bit of wire in the same way, but was unable thus to get
the food. As soon as a stick was placed in his cage, he grasped it and
used it in a very definite, although unskillful, way to pull the banana
toward him. He was extremely eager and impatient, but nevertheless
persistent in his efforts, and within five minutes from the beginning of
the first trial, he had succeeded in getting two pieces of banana, using
always his left hand to manipulate the stick. This test was repeated a
number of times with similar results. He had from the first the ability
to use a stick in this way, and the only difficulty with the test as a
means of obtaining evidence of ideational behavior is that the
possibility of imitation of man cannot be certainly excluded.


_Lock and Key Test_

By my assistant it was reported on May 5 that the orang utan had been
seen to place a splinter of wood in a padlock which was used on the
cages and to work with it persistently. It looked very much like
imitation of the human act of using the key, and I therefore planned a
test to ascertain whether Julius could readily and skillfully use a key
or could learn quickly to do so by watching me.

The first test was made on May 15 with a heavy box whose hinged lid was
held securely in position by means of a hasp and a padlock. The key,
which was not more than an inch in length, was fastened to a six inch
piece of wire so that Julius could not readily lose it. With the animal
opposite me, I placed a piece of banana in the box, then closed the lid
and snapped the padlock. I next handed Julius the key. He immediately
laid it on the floor opposite him and began biting the box, rolling it
around, and occasionally biting also at the lock and pulling at it.
During these activities he had pulled the box toward his cage. Now he
suddenly looked up to the position where the banana had been suspended
in the box experiment. Evidently the box had suggested to him the
banana. For thirty minutes he struggled with the box almost
continuously, chewing persistently at the hinges, the hasp, or the lock.
Then he took the key in his teeth and tried to push it into one of the
hinges, then into the crack beneath the lid of the box.

Subsequently I allowed him to see me use the key repeatedly, and as a
result, he came to use it himself now and then on the edge of the box,
but he never succeeded in placing it in the lock, and the outcome of the
experiment was total failure on the part of the animal to unfasten the
lock of his own initiative or to learn to use the key by watching me do
so. I did not make any special attempt to teach him to use the key, but
merely gave him opportunity to imitate, and it is by no means impossible
that he would have succeeded had the key been larger and had the
situation required less accurately coordinated movements. However, it is
fair to say that the evidence of the idea of using the key in the lock
was unconvincing. My assistant's observation was, perhaps, misleading in
so far as it suggested that idea. It may and probably was purely by
accident that the animal used the splinter on the padlock.


2. Skirrl, _Pithecus irus_


_Box Stacking Experiment_

The monkey Skirrl was tested by means of the box stacking experiment
much as Julius had been. On August 23, with a carrot suspended six feet
from the floor of the large cage and three boxes in distant corners, the
animal was admitted and his behavior noted.

The boxes, which were made of light, thin material, ranged in size from
one six inches in its several dimensions to one twenty inches long,
thirteen inches wide, and eleven inches deep. Only by using at least two
of these boxes was it possible for the animal to reach the carrot.

Immediately on admission to the cage, Skirrl began to gnaw at the boxes,
trying with all his might to tear them to pieces. After some thirty
minutes of such effort, interrupted by wanderings about the cage and
attempts to get at the other monkeys, he suddenly went to the largest
box of all, set it up on end almost directly under the carrot, mounted
it, and looked up at the food. It was still beyond his reach and he made
no effort to get it, but instead, he reached from his perch on the big
box for the next smaller box, which was approximately sixteen inches, by
fourteen, by twelve. This he succeeded in pulling toward him, at the
same time raising it slightly from the floor, but his efforts caused the
large box to topple over and he quit work. The experiment was
discontinued after a few minutes, the total period of observation having
been thirty-five minutes.

Skirrl handled the boxes with ease and with evident pleasure and
interest. He also noticed the carrot at various times during the
interval, but his attention was fixed on it only for short periods.

The test was continued on August 24 when, instead of a carrot, a half
banana was used as bait. It was placed only five feet from the floor,
and three boxes were as formerly placed in distant corners of the cage.
When admitted, Skirrl looked at the banana, then pulled one of the boxes
toward it, but instead of mounting, he went to the smallest box and
began to gnaw it. Shortly, he mounted the middle sized box and looked up
toward the banana, but the box was not directly under the bait, and in
any event, it would have been impossible for him to reach it. He next
went to the largest box, gnawed it vigorously, turned it over several
times, and then abandoned it for the middle sized box, from which by
skillful use of his teeth and hands, he quickly tore off one side.

By this time, apparently without very definitely directed effort on the
part of the monkey, all three of the boxes were in the center of the
cage and almost directly beneath the banana. Skirrl climbed up on the
largest box and made efforts to pull the middle sized one up on to it,
the while looking at the banana every few seconds. He did not succeed in
getting the boxes properly placed, and after a time began moving them
about restlessly.

His behavior plainly indicated that hunger was not his chief motive. He
was more interested in playing with things or in working with them than
in eating, and the satisfaction of tearing a box to pieces seemed even
greater than that of food. It is especially noteworthy that when Skirrl
attempts to dismember a box, instead of starting at random, he searches
carefully for a favorable starting point, a place where a board is
slightly loosened or where a slight crack or hole enables him to insert
his hand or use his teeth effectively. Many times during this experiment
he was observed to examine the boxes on all sides in search of some weak
point. If no such weak point were found, he shortly left the box; but if
he did find a favorable spot, he usually succeeded, before he gave up
the attempt, in doing considerable damage to the box.

Following the behavior described above, Skirrl returned to the middle
sized box, placed it on end under the banana, mounted, and looked upward
at the bait, but as it was a few inches beyond his reach, he made no
attempt to get it, but instead, after a few seconds, went to the
smallest box, and finding a weak point, began to tear it to pieces.

Later he rolled what was left of the smallest box close to the other two
boxes, nearly under the banana, and the remainder of his time was spent
gnawing at the boxes and playing with pieces which he had succeeded in
tearing from them. During the remainder of the thirty minute interval of
observation, no further attention was given the bait.

Again, on August 25, the test was tried, but this time with boxes whose
edges had been bound with tin so that it was impossible for the monkey
to destroy them. He spent several minutes searching for a starting point
on the middle sized box, but finding none, he dragged it under the
banana, looked up, mounted the box, but, as previously, did not reach
for the bait because it was beyond his reach. He then played with the
boxes for several minutes. Finally he worked the two smaller boxes to a
position directly under the banana, put the middle sized one on end,
mounted it, and looked at the bait, but again abandoned the attempt
without reaching.

During the thirty minutes of observation he made no definite effort to
place one box upon another. Three times he mounted one or another of the
boxes when it was under the banana or nearly so, but in no case was it
possible for him to reach the bait.

From the above description of this monkey's behavior, it seems fairly
certain that with sufficient opportunity, under strong hunger, he would
ultimately succeed in obtaining the bait by the use of two or more
boxes. For his somewhat abortive and never long continued efforts to
drag two boxes together or to place the one upon the other clearly
enough indicate a tendency which would ultimately yield success. The
possibility of imitation is not excluded, for Skirrl had opportunities
to see Julius and the experimenter handle the boxes.

Because of the other work which seemed more important at the time, this
experiment was not continued further. The results obtained suggest the
desirability of testing thoroughly the ability of monkeys to use objects
as only the anthropoid apes and man have heretofore been thought capable
of using them.


_Box and Pole Experiment_

Skirrl was first tested with the box and pole experiment on August 12.
As in the case of Julius, a half banana was placed in the middle of the
long box and the attention of the monkey was attracted to the bait by
small pieces of carrot placed near each open end. Two poles were placed
near the box on the floor of the cage. When admitted to the cage Skirrl
went almost directly to the ends of the box, took the pieces of carrot
which were in sight, but apparently failed to perceive the bait in the
middle of the box. For a while he played with the locks on the box,
shoved it about, and amused himself with it, showing no interest in
obtaining the food. Later he looked through the box and saw the banana.
He then dragged the box about, apparently trying to get it into his
cage, but he gave no attention to the poles nor did he make any evident
effort to obtain the banana which was easily visible in the center of
the box. The period of observation was only twelve minutes.

On August 24 this experiment was repeated with an important modification
of the apparatus in that the wooden lid of the long box had been
replaced by a wire cover through which the animal could see the bait.
Two poles were as formerly on the floor of the cage, not far from the
box. Skirrl almost immediately noticed the banana and tried to get it by
gnawing at the box. He did not once reach in at the ends of the box, but
he did handle the poles, throwing them about and pounding with them.
There was not the slightest attempt to use them in obtaining the bait.

This experiment was later repeated three times at intervals of a number
of days, but in no case did Skirrl show any tendency to use the poles as
means of obtaining the food.


_Draw-in Experiment_

This also was arranged in the same manner as for Julius, and on each of
five days Skirrl was allowed at least thirty minutes to work for the
bait. Either a banana or a carrot was each day placed on the board well
beyond his reach, and one or two, usually two, small sticks were put
into his cage. Not once during the several periods of observation did
Skirrl make any attempt to use a stick or any other object as a means of
drawing the food to him. Instead, he reached persistently with his arm,
pulled and gnawed at the wires which were in his way, and occasionally
picked up and gnawed or pounded with the sticks in the cage. His
attention every now and then would come back to the food, but it tended
to fluctuate rather rapidly, and in the regular period of observation,
thirty minutes, it is unlikely that he attended to the bait itself for
as much as five minutes. In this respect as well as many others,
Skirrl's behavior contrasts sharply with that of the orang utan.

The results of this experiment indicate the lack in the monkey of any
tendency or ability, apart from training, to use objects as means of
obtaining food. Ways of using objects as tools which apparently are
perfectly natural to the anthropoid apes and to man are rarely employed
by the lower primates.


_Hammer and Nail Test_

One day I happened to observe Skirrl playing with a staple in his cage.
He had found it on the floor where it had fallen and was intently
prodding himself with the sharp points, apparently enjoying the unusual
sensations which he got from sticking the staple into the skin in
various portions of his body, and especially into the prepuce.

A few days later I saw him playing in similar fashion with a nail which
he had found, and still later he was seen to be using a stick to pound
the nail with. This suggested to me the hammer and nail test.

A heavy spike was driven into an old hammer to serve as an
indestructible handle. This hammer, along with a number of large wire
nails and a piece of redwood board, was then placed in the monkey's
cage. Skirrl immediately took up the hammer, grasping the middle of the
handle with his left hand, and with his right hand taking up a nail. He
then sat down on the board, examined the nail, placed the pointed end on
the board, and with well directed strokes by the use of the head of the
hammer drove the nail into the board for the distance of at least an
inch. He then tried to pull it out, but was forced to knock it several
times with the hammer before he could do so.

This performance, during the next few minutes, was repeated several
times with variations. Often the side of the hammer was used instead of
the head, and occasionally, as is shown in figure 8 of plate II, he
seized the hammer well up toward the juncture of the same with the
spike. This figure does justice to the performance. At the moment the
picture was taken, Skirrl's attention had been attracted by a monkey in
an adjoining cage, and he had momentarily looked up from his task, the
while holding nail and hammer perfectly still.

This test was repeated on various days, and almost uniformly Skirrl
showed intense interest in hammer and nails and used them more or less
persistently in the manner described. Occasionally, apparently for the
sake of variety, he would put the blunt end of the nail on the board and
hammer on the point. Again, he would try persistently to drive the nail
into the cement floor, and once by accident, when hammer and nails were
left in his cage over night, he succeeded in making several holes in the
bottom of his sheet iron water pan. There was no doubting the keen
satisfaction which the animal took in this form of activity.

It is impossible to say that the behavior was not imitative of man, for
Skirrl, along with all of the other monkeys, had had abundant
opportunity to see carpenters working. But this much can be said against
the idea of imitation,--no one of the other animals, not excepting the
orang utan, showed any interest whatever in hammer and nails.
Occasionally they would be played with momentarily or pushed about, but
Sobke, Jimmie, Gertie, Julius, although given several opportunities to
exhibit any ability which they might have to drive nails, made not the
least attempt to do so. Evidently we must either conclude that Skirrl
had a peculiarly strong imitative tendency in this direction, or
instead, a pronounced disposition or instinct for the use of objects as
tools. It would seem fair to speak of it as an instinct for mechanical
activity.

Under this same heading may be described Skirrl's reactions to such
objects as a handsaw, a padlock, and a water faucet. The saw was given
to him in order to test his ability to use it in human fashion, for if
he could so expertly imitate the carpenter driving nails, it seems
likely that he might also imitate the use of the saw.

As a matter of fact, he showed no tendency to use the saw as we do.
Instead, he persistently played with it in various ways, at first using
it as a sort of plane to scrape with, later often rubbing the teeth over
a board so that they cut fairly well, but never as effectively as in the
hands of a man. After two or three days' practice with the saw, Skirrl
hit upon a method which is, as I understand, used by man in certain
countries, namely, that of placing the saw with the teeth up, holding it
rigid, and then rubbing the object which is to be sawed over it. This
Skirrl succeeded in doing very skillfully, for he would sit down on the
floor of the cage, grip with both feet the handle of the saw, with the
teeth directed upward, then holding either end in his hands, he would
repeatedly rub a stick over the teeth. In this way, of course, he could
make the saw cut fairly well. But still more to his liking was the use
of a spike instead of a stick as an object to rub over the teeth, for
with this he was able to make a noise that would have satisfied even a
small boy.

Further light is shed on the force of the tendency to imitate man by the
saw test. After Skirrl had been given an opportunity to show what he
could do with the tool spontaneously, I demonstrated to him the approved
human way of sawing. Often he would watch my performance intently as
though fascinated by the sound and motion, but when given the tool he
invariably followed his own methods. Although I repeated this test of
imitation several times on three different days, the results were wholly
negative.


_Other Activities_

One day as Skirrl was being returned to his own cage by way of the
larger cage, he picked up an unfastened padlock and carried it into the
cage with him. For more than an hour he amused himself almost without
interruption by playing with this lock. The things which he did with it
during that time would require pages to describe. His interest in it was
very similar to that which he had exhibited in hammer and nails, saw,
and indeed any objects which he could play with. The lock was pounded in
various ways, bitten, poked with nails, hooked into the wires of the
cage, used to pull on, pounded with a stick, used to hammer on the floor
of the cage with, and in fine, manipulated in quite as great a variety
of ways as a human being could have discovered. Finally it was hooked to
the side of the cage and snapped shut, and as Skirrl was unable to
dislodge it from this position, he shortly gave up playing with it.

At the end of the large cage and just outside the wire netting was a
faucet to which a hose was usually attached. The valve could be opened
by turning a wheel-shaped hand piece. Both Skirrl and Julius learned to
turn this wheel in order to get water to play with, but usually the
former's strength was not sufficient to turn on the water. The latter
could do it readily. The indications are that both animals profited by
seeing human beings turn on the water. This unquestionably attracted
their attention to the faucet, and probably by playing with it they
accidentally happened upon the proper movement. At any rate, Skirrl's
behavior was significant in this connection, for he would pick up the
hose to see if water were flowing, and if it were not, he would throw it
down, go directly to the faucet, and try to turn the wheel. The
association of the wheel with the desired flow of water was therefore
definitely established. Shall we describe the act as ideational? It
seems the natural thing to do.


3. Sobke, _Pithecus rhesus_


_Box Stacking Experiment_

For this test, in the case of Sobke, three light boxes made of redwood
about one-third of an inch thick were used. The smallest, box 1, was six
inches in each direction, the next larger, box 2, was twelve inches, and
the third, box 3, eighteen inches. As in the case of the other animals,
bait, either banana or carrot, was suspended from the middle of the roof
of the large cage at such distance from the floor as to be reached by
the animal only by the use of the boxes.

The first observations on Sobke were made on June 14. The three boxes
had been placed in the form of a pyramid directly under the banana,
which hung about eighteen inches above the uppermost box. Sobke's
attention while in his cage had been attracted to the bait by seeing me
fastening it in position, but when admitted to the large cage, he simply
glanced at it and then wandered about the cage, picking up bits of food
and struggling to get at the other monkeys. This he did for about five
minutes. He then went to the boxes, placed his hands on top of the
bottom one, but did not climb up on it. A few minutes later he returned
to the box again, climbed up, and readily reached the food, which he ate
while resting on boxes 1 and 2.

I now replaced the bait and gave the monkey a second chance to obtain
it. Almost immediately he climbed up as far as the second box, but
although he could reach the banana only from the uppermost box, he
deliberately shoved it off to the ground and sat down upon box 2. As he
was unable to obtain the banana from this, he soon began to gnaw and
pull at it, and as he was succeeding all too well in his efforts to tear
the box to pieces, he had to be returned to his cage.

The most important features of his behavior were, first, his stealthy
and indirect manner, and second, his failure to use other means of
obtaining the bait than that supplied by the observer. Instead of
looking straight at the experimenter, or at the object which he wished
to obtain, he apparently looked and attended elsewhere. For this reason
it was often difficult to decide whether or not he had noticed the bait
or the boxes. Finally I was led to conclude that he usually knew exactly
what was going on and had in his furtive way noted all of the essential
features of the situation, and that his manner was extremely indicative
of his mental attitude of limited trust. Both Julius and Skirrl went to
the opposite extreme in the matter of directness, or as we should say in
human relations, frankness. They would look the experimenter directly in
the eye, and they usually gazed intently at anything, such for example
as the bait, that interested them. Sobke, even when very hungry, instead
of going directly toward the bait, and trying to obtain it, usually did
various other things as though pretending that he had no interest in
food.

On the following day, June 15, the three boxes were again placed nearly
under the banana, but this time the two smaller boxes, numbers 1 and 2,
were pushed to the extreme end of the lower box and so far from the bait
that it could not be reached from box 1. It was necessary then for the
animal to push boxes 1 and 2 along on box 3 until they were nearer the
bait.

Sobke, when admitted to the cage, evidently noticed the banana, but as
formerly, he made no immediate effort to obtain it. After wandering in
search of food and quarreling with the other monkeys for several
minutes, he went to the boxes, pushed the topmost one, number 1, off on
to the floor, and then carried it into his cage where he quickly tore
one side off. He next returned to the large cage, climbed up on box 2,
and he was able, by jumping, to reach and obtain the banana.

As Sobke was very good at jumping, his new method rendered the box
stacking experiment of uncertain value, since it was next to impossible
so to arrange the spatial relations of bait and boxes that he should be
neither discouraged by too great a distance nor encouraged to jump by
too small a distance. Evidently it would be more satisfactory to
simplify the conditions by trying to discover, first of all, whether he
would use a single box as a means of reaching the reward.

In pursuance of this idea, I suspended a piece of bread five feet from
the floor of the cage, and a few feet to one side of it, I placed a box
from which it could be reached, or at least easily seized by jumping.
Sobke shortly walked to a point beneath the bait and leaping into the
air, seized it.

I then replaced the bait, raising it to a height of five feet ten inches
from the floor of the cage. When I had retired, Sobke placed himself in
the proper position beneath, looked up at it, but went away without
jumping for it. During the remaining ten minutes of observation, he paid
no further attention to the bait, having satisfied himself evidently
that it was beyond his reach.

My use of this test was concluded on June 16 when once more I suspended
a piece of bread six feet from the floor and placed a few feet to one
side the eighteen inch box, number 3, from which had the monkey pushed
it to a point directly under the bread, he could have obtained the food
easily. Sobke noticed the food promptly, and from time to time as he
wandered about, he glanced at it out of the corner of his eye, but not
once did he sit down and look at it steadily and directly as Julius and
Skirrl might have done.

In the first twenty minutes of observation the monkey made no attempt
either to use the box or to reach the food by jumping. I then placed the
box directly under the bait, and scarcely had I withdrawn from the cage
before Sobke climbed up on it and looked toward the food. He could not
reach it without jumping, and he made no effort to get it. I had left a
second box in the cage,--one which I had been using as a seat. Sobke now
went to this box, placed his hands on it, looked toward the bait, and
then went to a distant part of the cage. No further indications were
obtained during the remainder of the period of observation of interest
in the boxes as possible means of obtaining the desired food.

It is of course obvious that this experiment was not long enough
continued to justify the conclusion that either Sobke or Skirrl could
not use the boxes or even learn to place one box upon another in order
to obtain the bait. The experiment, like several others which are being
described briefly, was used to supplement the multiple-choice
experiment, and the experimenter's chief interest was to discover the
number and variety of methods which would be used by the animal in
the first few presentations of a situation. It is practically certain
that both of these monkeys would have succeeded ultimately in solving
the problem of obtaining the food had they been left in the cage with a
number of boxes, for Skirrl very early indicated interest in moving the
boxes about, and Sobke showed a tendency in that direction which perhaps
was inhibited partially by his distrust of the experimenter.


_Draw-in Experiment_

For Sobke, as for Julius and Skirrl, the draw-in test was made by
putting food on a shelf outside the cage, beyond the reach of the
animal, and placing in the cage with the animal one or two sticks long
enough to be used for drawing in the bait.

Sobke was first given this test on July 24. He tried persistently to
reach the banana with his hand, seized the box which supported the bait,
shook it, picked up one or other of the sticks, and chewed at it
repeatedly, but not once did he make any move to use a stick to draw the
food toward him.

This experiment was repeated on July 27, 29, 30 and 31, a period of
thirty minutes being allowed on each day for observation. At no time did
Sobke show any inclination to use either a stick or any other object as
a means of reaching the bait. Instead, he confined himself strictly to
the use of hands and teeth.

This test makes it fairly certain that Sobke had no natural tendency to
use objects as tools. In so far as he attended to things about the cage
or laboratory, it seemed to be rather to play with them in a general way
than to use them ideationally or otherwise for definite purposes.

The definitely negative result of the draw-in experiment rendered
needless prolonged observation with the box and pole test, whose results
are now to be presented.


_Box and Pole Experiment_

The eighty-four inch box, previously used for a similar test with
Julius, was presented to Sobke on August 24, the wooden cover having
been replaced by a wire one so that the monkey could readily see the
bait in the middle of the box. Sobke, when admitted to the large cage,
went directly to the box and at once discovered the banana which was
midway between the ends. He evidently desired it. Shortly, he went to
one end of the box and looked in. This he repeated later. He also shook
the box and tried to pull it about and tear it with his teeth, but to
the two poles lying nearby on the floor of the cage he gave not the
slightest attention during a thirty minute period of observation.

The experiment was not repeated because of more important work.


_Other Activities_

In more respects than I have taken time to enumerate in the above
descriptions of behavior, the relations of Sobke to objects differed
from those of Skirrl, and still more from those of Julius. Hammer,
nails, saw, stones, sticks, locks, and various other objects received
relatively little attention from Sobke unless they happened to come in
his way; then they were usually pushed aside with but scant notice.
Rarely he would carry something to the shelf of his cage with him, but
as a rule only to lay it down and attend to something else. Skirrl, on
the contrary, attended persistently to anything new in the shape of a
movable object. He was extremely partial to objects which could be
manipulated by him in various ways, and especially to any thing with
which he could make a noise. His interest in hammer and nails, saw,
locks, etc., seemed never to wane. I have seen him play for an hour
almost uninterruptedly with a hammer and a nail, or even with a big
spike which he could use to pry about his cage. In the absence of
anything more interesting, even a staple or a small nail might receive
his undivided attention for minutes at a time. How important is the
species difference in this connection, I have no means to judge, but if
we may not consider these different modes of behavior characteristic of
_P. rhesus_ as contrasted with _P. irus_, we must conclude that
remarkable individual differences exist among monkeys, for whereas
Skirrl is by nature a mechanical genius, Sobke has apparently no such
disposition. I can imagine no more fascinating task than the careful
analytical study of the temperaments of these two animals. Skirrl's
behavior has importantly modified my conception of genius.



V

MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS


1. _Right- and left-handedness_

Several years ago Doctor Hamilton reported to me observations which he
had made on preference for the right or left paw in dogs. He has not, I
believe, published an account of his work. Subsequently, Franz observed
a similar preference in monkeys which, according to his report, exhibit
marked tendency to be right-handed, left-handed, or ambidextrous.

My own observations, although they are wholly incidental to my other
work, seem worthy of description at this point. I noted, first of all,
that the orang utan Julius tended to use his left hand. He by no means
limited himself to this, but in difficult situations he almost
invariably reached for food or manipulated objects in connection with
food getting with the left hand. Figures 23 and 24 of plate V, show him
reaching for a banana with the left hand. Likewise, figure 34 exhibits
the use of the left hand in the draw-in experiment.

So marked was Julius's preference for his left hand that I became
interested in observing similar phenomena in the monkeys. Skirrl, when
driving nails, held the hammer with his left hand and the nail with his
right hand. The fact that he never was observed to reverse the use of
the hands is surprising, for other observations indicate that he
preferred the right hand for certain acts.

Stimulated by the obvious left-handedness, in certain connections, of
Julius and Skirrl, I tested the preference of several of the monkeys in
the following simple way. Standing outside the cage I would hold out a
peanut to a hungry animal, keeping it so far from the cage that the
monkey could barely reach it with its fingers. I noted the hand which
was used to grasp the food. Next I varied the procedure by placing the
peanut on a board in order to make sure that I was not definitely
directing the animal's attention.

With Sobke the following results were obtained. In forty trials given on
two different days, he reached for and obtained the food each time with
his left hand. Only by holding the bait well toward the right side of
his body was it possible to induce him to use the right hand. So far as
may be judged from these observations and from others in connection with
the experiments, this animal is definitely left-handed.

With Skirrl the results are strikingly different. As stated above, he
used the hammer consistently with his left hand, but in twenty attempts
to obtain food by reaching, he used his right hand seventeen times and
his left only three times. It was quite as difficult to induce him to
use his left hand for this purpose as it was to induce Sobke to use his
right. We must therefore conclude that Skirrl is right-handed in
connection with certain movements and left-handed in others.

The monkey named Gertie in the reaching experiment consistently used her
left hand, never once using the right.

Jimmie, so far as it was possible to make tests with him, also used his
left hand, but it should be said that the results are unsatisfactory
because he was at the time extremely pugnacious and paid attention to
the experimenter rather than to the food.

Scotty, in the first series of ten trials, used his right hand eight
times, his left twice. In the second series, given the following day, he
used the right hand three times and the left seven times. From this we
should have to infer that he is ambidextrous.

A female _rhesus_ monkey which had been brought to the laboratory only a
few days previously showed a preference for the right hand by the use of
it fourteen times to six.

In connection with these data which are, I should repeat, too scanty to
be of any considerable value, I wish to describe my own experience.
Although naturally left-handed, I am by training right-handed to the
extent of having been able to use my hands in writing and in various
other activities equally well at the age of twelve. I am at present
ambidextrous in that there are many things which I do with equal
readiness and skill with either hand. Delicate, exact, and finely
coordinated movements, such as those of writing and using surgical
instruments, I perform always with my left hand while grosser movements
involving the whole hand or arm, I am rather likely to perform with my
right hand.

It seems not improbable in the light of my own experience that we shall
find some specialization among the lower animals with respect to
preference for right and left hand or arm. I should not be at all
surprised to discover that it is the rule for animals to possess or to
develop readily definite preference for one hand in connection with a
given act of skill and to have quite as definite a preference for the
other hand in connection with a radically different kind of act.


2. _Instinct and emotion_

Of the many presumably instinctive modes of behavior which were
observed, only those which have to do with social relations seem
especially worth reporting. From among them I shall select for
description a few which have already been referred to in connection with
the experimental observations.


_Maternal Instinct_

Aspects of the maternal instinct I had opportunity to observe in Gertie,
who on February 27 gave birth to a male infant, I present below the
substance of a previously published note on her behavior (Yerkes, 1915).

"On February 27 one of the monkeys of our collection gave birth, in the
cages at Montecito, to a male infant. The mother is a _Macacus
cynomolgus rhesus_ (_P. irus rhesus_) who has been described by Hamilton
(1914, p. 298) as 'Monkey 9, Gertie, _M. cynomolgus rhesus_ (_P. irus
rhesus_). Age, 3 years 2 months. (She is now, May 1, 1915, 4 years and 6
months.) Daughter of monkeys 3 and 10. First pregnancy began September,
1913.' The result of this pregnancy was, I am informed, a still-birth.

"The second pregnancy, which shall now especially concern us, resulted
likewise in a still-birth. Parturition occurred Saturday night, and the
writer first observed the behavior of the mother the following Monday
morning. In the meantime the laboratory attendant had obtained the data
upon which I base the above statements.

"At the time of parturition Gertie was in a 6 by 6 by 12 foot out-door
cage containing a small shelter box, with an exceptionally quiet and
gentle male (not the father of the infant) who is designated in
Hamilton's paper as Monkey 28, Scotty.

"My notes record the following exceptionally interesting and genetically
important behavior. On March 1, when I approached her cage, Gertie was
sitting on the floor with the infant held in one hand while she fingered
its eyelids and eyes with the other. Scotty sat close beside her
watching intently. When disturbed by me the mother carried her infant to
a shelf at the top of the cage. Repeatedly attempts were made to remove
the dead baby, but they were futile because Gertie either held it in her
hands or sat close beside it ready to seize it at the slightest
disturbance.

"Especially noteworthy on this, the second day after the birth of the
infant, are the male's, as well as the female's, keen interest in the
body and their frequent examinations of the eyes, as if in attempts to
open them. Often, also, the mother searched the body for fleas.

"Observations were made from day to day, and each day opportunity was
sought to remove the body without seriously frightening or exciting the
female. No such opportunity came, and during the second week the corpse
so far decomposed that, with constant handling and licking by the
adults, it rapidly wore away. By the third week there remained only the
shriveled skin covering a few fragments of bone, and the open skull from
the cavity of which the brain had been removed. This the mother never
lost sight of: even when eating she either held it in one hand or foot,
or laid it beside her within easy reach.

"Gradually this remnant became still further reduced until on March 31
there existed only a strip of dry skin about four inches long with a
tail-like appendage of nearly the same length.

"The male, Scotty, on this date was removed to another cage. Gertie made
a great fuss, jumping about excitedly and uttering plaintive cries when
she discovered that her mate was gone. Whenever I approached her cage
she scurried into the shelter box and stayed there while I was near.
This behavior I never before had observed. It continued for two days. On
April 2, it was noted that she had lost her recently acquired shyness
and she no longer made any attempts to avoid me. As usual, on this date,
she was carrying the remnant about with her.

"The following day, April 3, Gertie was lured from her cage to a large
adjoining compartment for certain experimental observations. After she
had been returned to her own cage the remnant was noticed on the floor
of the large cage. I picked it up. Gertie evidently noticed my act; for
although at a distance of at least ten feet from me, she made a sharp
outcry and sprang to the side of the cage nearest me. I held the piece
of skin (it looked more like a bit of rat skin than the remains of a
monkey) out to her and she immediately seized it and rushed with it to
the shelf at the top of the cage.

"Two days later the remnant was missing, and careful search failed to
discover it in the cage. It is probable that Gertie had carelessly left
it lying on the floor whence it was washed out when the cages were
cleaned. On this date Gertie seemed quieter than for weeks previously.

"Thus it appears that during a period of five weeks the instinct to
protect her offspring impelled this monkey to carry its gradually
vanishing remains about with her and to watch over them so assiduously
that it was utterly impossible to take them from her except by force.

"After reading this note in manuscript, Doctor Hamilton informed me that
Gertie had behaved toward her first still-birth as toward her second.
And, further, that Grace, a baboon, also carried a still-birth about for
weeks.

"I am now heartily glad that my early efforts to remove the corpse were
futile, for this record of the persistence of maternal behavior seems to
me of very unusual interest to the genetic psychologist."


_Fear_

In connection with the multiple-choice experiments Skirrl exhibited what
seemed to be instinctive fear as a result of his unfortunate experience
with nails in the floor of box 1. He seemingly referred his misadventure
to some unseen enemy under the floor, and this in spite of the fact that
he was given abundant opportunity to examine the floor of the box, but
not until after the dangerous nails had been clinched. His long
continued avoidance of the experiment boxes and his still more
persistent hesitancy in entering them, coupled with his almost ludicrous
efforts to see beneath the floor through the holes cut for the staples
on the doors, gave me the impression of superstitious fear of the
unseen. As I watched and recorded his behavior day after day during the
period of most pronounced fear, I could not avoid the thought that the
instinctive fear of snakes had something to do with his peculiar
actions, and although I have never studied either the natural or the
acquired responses of monkeys to snakes, I suspect that lacking such
instinctive equipment, Skirrl would have behaved differently as a result
of the pricks which he received from the nails. It is needless to
redescribe his acquired fear of whiteness as it manifested itself in the
freshly painted apparatus. Accompanying these instructive modes of
response and their emotions are suggestions of peculiarly interesting
problems as well as of modes of attacking them. As a matter of fact,
Skirrl's fear-reactions did much to alter my conception of the
constitution of his mind. I should not have been surprised by the
features of behavior exhibited, but I was by no means prepared for their
persistence, and for the highly emotional attitude toward the particular
situation. Only an organism of complexly constituted nervous system and
fairly highly developed affective life could be expected to respond as
did this monkey. As has been suggested above, I find the appeal to
instinct, modified by experience, a natural mode of accounting for the
unexpected features of Skirrl's behavior.


_Sympathy_

The instinctive playfulness of the young monkey Tiny contrasted most
strikingly with the more serious, if not more sedate, modes of behavior
of the older individuals.

During the greater part of my period of observation Tiny was cage-mate
of Scotty, the most calm and apparently lazy of all the monkeys. Tiny
delighted in teasing Scotty, and her varied modes of mildly tormenting
him and of stirring him to pursuit or to retaliation were as interesting
as they were amusing. Her most common trick was to steal up behind him
and pull the hair of his back, or seize his tail with her hands or
teeth. Often when he was asleep she would suddenly run to him, give a
sudden jerk at a handful of hairs, and leap away. He was surprisingly
patient, and I never saw him treat her roughly in retaliation.

Another of Tiny's favorite forms of amusement was that of trying to stir
up the other monkeys to attacks on one another. She very cleverly did
this by pretending that she herself was being attacked. The instant the
older animals began to show hostility toward one another she would leap
out of the way and watch the disturbance with evident satisfaction. It
was this mode of behavior in the little animal which ultimately provided
opportunity for the observations which I wish now to report as
indicative of sympathetic, possibly I may say altruistic, emotions.

Tiny was confined with Scotty in a cage adjoining the one in which
Jimmie and Gertie were being kept. The cages were separated by wire
netting of half-inch mesh.

One morning as I was watching the behavior of the animals in the several
cages, I noticed Tiny dressing with her teeth a wounded finger. It had
evidently been bitten by one of the other animals, in all probability
either by Jimmie or Gertie. Tiny was trimming away the loose bits of
skin very neatly and cleansing the wound. After working at this task for
a few minutes, she quickly climbed up to the shelf near the top of her
cage, and by rushing to the partition wire between the two cages, she
lured Gertie to an attempted attack on her. Gertie sprang up to the
partition, placed her hands on it, with the fingers projecting through
the meshes, and attempted to seize Tiny's fingers with her teeth. But
the latter was too quick for her, and withdrawing her hands, like a
flash seized in her teeth the middle finger of Gertie's left hand. She
then bit it severely and with all her might, at the same time pulling
and twisting violently, often placing the entire weight of her body on
the finger. Her sharp teeth cut to the bone, and it was impossible for
the larger and stronger monkey to tear away. For several seconds this
continued, then Gertie succeeded in escaping, whereupon she at once
retreated to the opposite end of her shelf and proceeded to attend to
her injured finger. She cried, wrung her hands, and from time to time
placed the finger in her mouth as though in an effort to relieve the
pain. By this time Jimmie's attention had been attracted by the
disturbance and he rushed up to the shelf, and facing Gertie, watched
her intently for a few seconds. The look of puzzled concern on his face
was most amusing. Apparently he felt dimly that something in which he
should have intelligent interest was going on, but was unable wholly to
understand the situation. After watching Gertie for a time and trying to
discover what she was doing, which was rendered difficult by her
tendency to turn away from him, in order to shield her injured finger,
he rushed over to the wire partition and made strenuous efforts to seize
Tiny with his hands and teeth. But although she continued close to the
partition and often crowded against it with face and hands flattened on
the wires, he was not able to get hold of her, and after a few vain
attempts he returned to his mate, and again with evident solicitousness
and the most troubled expression, watched her wringing her hands and
chewing or sucking at her injured finger. Shortly he again returned to
the partition and renewed his attempts to seize the young monkey. Thus
he went back and forth from one place of interest to the other several
times, but being unable to achieve anything at either point, he finally
gave up and returned to his breakfast on the floor of the cage.

I report this incident fully because the behavior of Jimmie was in
marked contrast with the usual behavior of the monkeys. Selfishness
seemed everywhere dominant, while clear indications of sympathetic
emotions were rare indeed. The above is undoubtedly the best evidence of
anything altruistic that I obtained.

It is possible that Tiny's action was retaliatory, but although it is
practically certain that either Gertie or Jimmie inflicted the wound on
her finger, I of course cannot be sure that the spirit of revenge
stirred her to punish Gertie so severely. Jimmie's part in the whole
affair is, however, perfectly intelligible from our human point of view,
and there seems no reason to doubt that he did experience something like
a feeling of sympathy with his mate, coupled with a feeling of
resentment or anger against Tiny.



VI

HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL DISCUSSION OF IDEATIONAL BEHAVIOR IN MONKEYS AND
APES


It is my purpose in this section to indicate the relations of my work on
monkeys and apes to that of other investigators. Although throughout the
report I have used freely the psychological terms idea and ideation, it
has been my aim to describe the behavior of my animals rather than to
interpret it or speculate concerning its accompaniments. Certain acts I
have designated as ideational simply because they seemed to exhibit the
essential features of what we call ideational behavior in man. Further
study may, and probably will, modify my opinion concerning this matter.
It is of prime importance to analyze ideational behavior so that it may
be accurately described and satisfactorily defined in terms of its
distinguishing characteristics. I had hoped to be able to present a
tentative analysis in this report, but the results of my efforts are so
unsatisfactory that I do not feel justified in publishing them.

The terms idea and ideation have been used to designate contents of
consciousness which are primarily representative. Nowhere have I
attempted to indicate different types or grades of ideational behavior
and nowhere have I found it necessary to emphasize differences between
image and idea. In general, the acts which I have called ideational have
been highly adaptive, and the learning processes in connection with
which they have appeared have differed strikingly from those of the
selective sort in their abruptness of appearance.

Extremely interesting and valuable definitions of ideation and
discussions of the characteristics of different sorts of ideas in the
light of original observations on monkeys have been presented by
Thorndike (1901, pp. 1, 2; 1911, p. 174); Kinnaman (1902, p. 200); and
Hobhouse (1915, p. 270). As these authors have contributed importantly
to our knowledge of the behavior of monkeys, their discussions of the
meaning of terms are especially valuable. Serviceable definitions are to
be found, also, in Romanes (1900), Morgan (1906), Washburn (1908), and
Holmes (1911).


_Evidences of Ideation in Monkeys_

Aside from anecdotal and traveller's notes on the behavior of monkeys
and apes we have only a scanty literature. In fact, the really excellent
articles on the behavior and mental life of these animals may be counted
on one's fingers; and not more than half of these are experimental
studies. I shall, in this brief historical sketch, neglect entirely the
anecdotal literature, since my own work is primarily experimental, and
since its results should naturally be compared with those of other
experimenters.

Thorndike (1901), the American pioneer in the application of the
experimental method to the study of mind in animals, published the first
notable paper on the psychology of monkeys. His results force the
conclusion that "free ideas" seldom appear in the monkey mind and have a
relatively small part in behavior. That the species of Cebus which he
observed exhibits various forms of ideation he is willing to admit. But
he insists that it is of surprisingly little importance in comparison
with what the general behavior of monkeys as known in captivity and as
described by the anecdotal writers have led us to expect. It is
important to note, however, that Thorndike's observations were limited
to Cebus monkeys which, as contrasted with various old world types, are
now considered of relatively low intelligence.

In many respects the most thoroughgoing and workmanlike experimental
study of monkeys is that of Kinnaman (1902), who has reported on the
study of various forms of response in _P. rhesus_. He presents valuable
data concerning the learning processes, sensory discrimination, reaction
to number, and to tests of imitation. His results indicate a higher
level of intelligence than that discovered by Thorndike, but this is
almost certainly due to difference in the species observed. Kinnaman
goes so far as to say "We have found evidence, also, of general notions
and reasoning, both of low order" (p. 211).

The contribution of Hobhouse (1915) to our knowledge of the mental life
of monkeys, although in a measure experimental, is based upon relatively
few and unsystematic observations as contrasted with those of Thorndike
and Kinnaman. It appears, however, that Hobhouse's experiments were
admirably planned to test the ideational capacity of his subjects, and
one can not find a more stimulating discussion of ideation than that
contained in his "Mind in Evolution." The results of his tests made with
a _P. rhesus_ monkey are similar to those of Kinnaman, for almost all of
them indicate the presence and importance of ideas.

Watson (1908) in tests of the imitative ability of _P. rhesus_ saw
relatively little evidence of other than extremely simple forms of
ideation. But in contrast with his results, those obtained by Haggerty
(1909), in a much more extended investigation in which several species
of monkey were used, obtained more numerous and convincing evidences of
ideation in imitative behavior. Although this author wholly avoids the
use of psychological terms, seeking to limit himself to a strictly
objective presentation of results, it is clear from an unpublished
manuscript (thesis for the Doctorate of Philosophy, deposited in the
Library of Harvard University) that he would attribute to monkeys simple
forms of ideational experience.

Witmer (1910) reports, in confirmation of Haggerty's results,
intelligently imitative behavior in _P. irus_.

The work of Shepherd (1910) agrees closely, so far as evidences of
ideation are concerned, with that of Thorndike. He obviously strives for
conservatism in his statements concerning the adaptive intelligence of
his monkeys, all of which belonged to the species _P. rhesus_. At one
point he definitely states that they exhibit ideas of a low order, or
something which corresponds to them. Satisfactory evidences of reasoning
he failed to obtain.

Franz's (1907, 1911) studies of monkeys, unlike those mentioned above,
have for their chief motive not the accurate description of various
features of behavior but instead knowledge of the functions of various
portions of the brain. His results, therefore, although extremely
interesting and of obvious value to the comparative psychologist, throw
no special light upon the problem of ideation.

The investigation by Hamilton (1911) of reactive tendencies in _P.
rhesus_ and _irus_ yielded preeminently important data concerning
complex behavior. For the ingenious quadruple-choice method devised by
this observer showed that mature monkeys exhibit fairly adequate types
of response. As Hamilton's interest centered in behavior, he did not
discuss ideation, but this does not prevent the comparison of his data
with those of the present report, and the agreement of his findings with
my own is obvious.

My work contrasts sharply with that briefly mentioned above in that I
applied systematically and over a period of several months an
experimental method suited to reveal problem solving ability.
Previously, the so-called problem or puzzle-box method had been used as
a means of testing for the presence of ideas. For this I substituted the
multiple-choice method. One of the chief advantages of this new method
is the possibility of obtaining curves of learning for the solution or
attempted solution of relational problems of varying difficultness. I am
confident that these curves of learning will prove far more valuable
than such data as are yielded by the puzzle-box method.

The Pithecus monkeys, which I studied intensively, yielded relatively
abundant evidences of ideation, but with Thorndike I must agree that of
"free ideas" there is scanty evidence; or rather, I should prefer to
say, that although ideas seem to be in play frequently, they are rather
concrete and definitely attached than "free." Neither in my sustained
multiple-choice experiments nor from my supplementary tests did I obtain
convincing indications of reasoning. What Hobhouse has called articulate
ideas, I believe to appear infrequently in these animals. But on the
whole, I believe that the general conclusions of previous experimental
observers have done no injustice to the ideational ability of monkeys.
It is clearly important, however, that we always should take into
account the species of animal observed, for unquestionably there are
extreme differences in mental development among the monkeys.

As I view my results in the light of their relations to earlier work, I
am strongly impressed with the importance of the use of improved methods
for the study of complex behavior. The delayed reaction method of
Hunter, the quadruple-choice method of Hamilton, and my multiple-choice
method offer new and promising approaches to forms of activity which
thus far have been only superficially observed.

The ability exhibited by Skirrl to try a method out and then to abandon
it suddenly is characteristic of animals high in intelligence. Most of
the problems which I presented to my animals would be rated as difficult
by psychologists, for as a rule they involved definite relations and
demanded on the part of the subject both perception of a particular
relation and the ability to remember or re-present it on occasion.

I was greatly surprised by the slow progress of the monkeys toward the
solution of these problems. It had been my supposition that they would
solve them more quickly than any lower type of mammal, but as a matter
of fact they succeeded less well than did pigs. Their behavior
throughout the work proved that of far greater significance for the
experimenter than the solution of a problem is definite knowledge of the
modes of behavior exhibited from moment to moment, or day to day. This
is true especially of those incidental or accidental modes of response
which so frequently appeared in connection with my work that I came to
look upon them, the surprises of each day, as my chief means of insight.


_Evidences of Ideation in Apes_

Reliable literature of any sort concerning the behavior and mental life
of the anthropoid apes is difficult to find, and still more rare are
reports concerning experimental studies of these animals. There are, it
is true, a few articles descriptive of tests of mental ability, but even
these are scarcely deserving of being classed as satisfactory
experimental studies of the psychology of the ape. I have the
satisfaction of being able to present in the present report the first
systematic experimental study of any feature of the behavior of an
anthropoid ape.

Among the most interesting and valuable of the descriptions which may be
classed among accounts of tests of mental ability is Hobhouse's (1915)
study of the chimpanzee. The subject was an untrained animal, so far as
stated, of somewhat unsatisfactory condition because of timidity.
Nevertheless, Hobhouse was able to obtain from him numerous and
interesting responses to novel situations, some of which may be safely
accepted as evidences of ideation of a fairly high order.

Similar in method and result to the work of Hobhouse is that of Haggerty
(unpublished thesis for the Doctorate of Philosophy, deposited in the
Library of Harvard University). Haggerty's tests of the ability of young
orang utans and chimpanzees to solve simple problems and to use tools in
various ways yielded results which contrast most strikingly with those
obtained in his experimental study of the imitative tendency in monkeys.
His observations, had he committed himself to anything approaching
interpretation, doubtless would have led him to conclusions concerning
the ideational life of these animals very similar to those of Hobhouse.

Koehler, working in the Canary Islands, has, according to information
which I have received from him by letter, made certain experiments with
orang utans and chimpanzees similar to those of Hobhouse and Haggerty.
His results I am unable to report as I have scanty information
concerning them. They are, presumably, as yet unpublished.

In his laboratory at Montecito, California, Hamilton has from time to
time kept anthropoid apes, but without special effort to investigate
their ideational behavior. He has most interesting and valuable data
concerning certain habits and instincts, all as yet unpublished.

To a congress of psychologists Pfungst (1912) briefly reported on work
with anthropoid apes in certain of the German zo√∂logical gardens. His
preliminary paper does not enable one to make definite statements
concerning either his methods or such results as he may have obtained
concerning ideational behavior. So far as I know, he has not as yet
published further concerning his investigation.

M√∂bius (1867) has described interesting observations concerning the
mental life of the chimpanzee. But this, like all of the work previously
mentioned, is rather in the nature of casual testing than thoroughgoing,
systematic, and analytic study.

In addition to the above reports, there are a few concerning the
behavior of apes which have been especially trained for purposes of
exhibition. Most interesting of these is that of Witmer (1909), who
studied in exhibitions and in his own laboratory the behavior of the
chimpanzee Peter. The varied forms of intelligently adaptive behavior
exhibited by this ape convinced Witmer of ideational experience and even
of an approach to reasoning. In his brief report he expresses especial
interest in the possibility of educating this "genius among apes" to the
use of language.

A chimpanzee named Consul was observed several years ago by Hirschlaff
(1905), and his tricks were interestingly described from the pedagogical
standpoint.

Similar in character is Shepherd's (1915) brief description of the stage
behavior of Peter and Consul, both chimpanzees. It is impossible to
determine from the account whether these animals are the same as were
observed by both Witmer and Hirschlaff. As no reference is made in
Shepherd's paper to other descriptions of the behavior of these animals
and as he adds nothing to what had already been presented, the reader
obtains no additional light on ideation.

I have mentioned only samples of the articles on trained anthropoids.
All are necessarily descriptions of the behavior of individuals who had
been trained not for psychological purposes but for the vaudeville
stage, and although such observations unquestionably have certain value
for comparative psychology, it is well known that unless an observer
knows the history of an act, he is not able to evaluate it in terms of
intelligence and is especially prone to overestimate its value as
evidence of ideation.

There remain studies of the apes, dealing primarily with behavior and
mental characteristics, which are slightly if at all experimental and
deserve to be ranked as naturalistic accounts. Such is, for example, the
book of Sokolowski (1908), in which attention is given to the
characteristics of young as well as fairly mature specimens of the
gorilla, chimpanzee and orang utan.

The various publications of Garner (1892, 1896, 1900) deal especially
with the language habits of monkeys and apes, but observations bearing
on ideation are reported.

Wallace (1869) describes certain features of the behavior of an infant
orang utan whose mother he shot in Borneo. He also reports observations
concerning the behavior of adult orang utans, many specimens of which
were shot by him during his travels.

Early in the last century, Cuvier (1810) interested himself in studies
of the intellectual characteristics of the orang utan, and his data,
taken with those of Wallace, Sokolowski, and others similarly interested
in the natural history of mind, give one a valuable glimpse of the life
of the anthropoid ape.

Finally, the data brought together by Brehm (1864, 1875, 1888) in his
famous Tierleben; by Darwin (1859, 1871) in "The Origin of Species," and
other works, by Romanes (1900), especially in his books on mental
evolution, by C. Lloyd Morgan (1906) in his several works on comparative
psychology, and by Holmes (1911) in his discussion of the evolution of
intelligence, contribute not unimportantly to our all too meagre
knowledge of the mental life of the anthropoid apes.

My own results, viewed in the light of what one may learn from the
literature, stand out as unique because of the method of research. Never
before, so far as I have been able to learn, has any ape been subjected
to observation under systematically controlled conditions for so long a
period as six months. Moreover, my multiple-choice method has the merit
of having yielded the first curve of learning for an anthropoid ape.
This fact is especially interesting when one considers the nature of the
particular curve. For so far as one may say by comparing it with the
curves for various learning processes exhibited by other mammals, it is
indicative of ideation of a high order, and possibly of reasoning. I do
not wish to exaggerate the importance of my results, for as contrasted
with what might be obtained by further study, and with what must be
obtained if we are adequately to describe the mind of the orang utan,
they are meager indeed.

Especially noteworthy, as evidences of ideation, in the results yielded
by the multiple-choice method are (1) the use by the orang utan of
several different methods in connection with each problem; (2) the
suddenness of transition from method to method; (3) the final and
perfect solution of problem I without diminution of the initial errors;
(4) the dissociation of the act of turning in a circle from that of
standing in front of a particular box.

To these features of behavior others of minor importance might be added.
But as they have been sufficiently emphasized in the foregoing detailed
descriptions, I need only repeat my conclusion, from the summation of
evidence, that this young orang utan exhibited numerous free ideas and
simple thought processes in connection with the multiple-choice
experiment. His ultimate failure to solve the second problem is
peculiarly interesting, although in the light of other features of his
behavior by no means indicative of inferior intelligence.

The various supplementary experimental tests which I employed are in no
wise importantly distinguished from those used by other observers. The
box stacking experiment has, according to my private information, been
used by Koehler. It is obviously important that such tests be applied in
the same manner to individuals not only of the different genera of
anthropoid apes, but of different ages, sex, and condition of training.

The box stacking experiment, although it yielded complete success only
as a result of suggestion on my part, proved far more interesting during
its progress than any other portion of my work. In connection with it,
the orang utan exhibited surprisingly diverse and numerous efforts to
meet the demands of the situation. It is fair to characterize him as
inventive, for of the several possible ways of obtaining the banana
which were evident to the experimenter, the ape voluntarily used all but
two or three, and one of these he subsequently used on the basis of
imitation.

Had Julius been physically and mentally mature, my results would
undoubtedly have been much more impressively indicative of ideas, but
even as matters stand, the survey of my experimental records and
supplementary notes force me to conclude that as contrasted with the
monkeys and other mammals, the orang utan is capable of expressing free
ideas in considerable number and of using them in ways highly indicative
of thought processes, possibly even of the rational order. But
contrasted with that of man the ideational life of the orang utan seems
poverty stricken. Certainly in this respect Julius was not above the
level of the normal three-year-old child.

In common with other observers, I have had the experience of being
profoundly impressed by the versatility of the ape, and however much I
might desire to disprove the presence of free ideas and simple reasoning
processes in the orang utan, I should feel bound to accept many of the
results of my tests as evidences of such experience.

I have attempted to indicate briefly the historical setting of my
investigation. I propose, now, in the concluding section, to look
forward from this initial research and to indicate as well as I may in a
few words the possibilities of results important for mankind from the
thorough study of the monkeys and anthropoid apes.



VII

PROVISION FOR THE STUDY OF THE PRIMATES, AND ESPECIALLY THE MONKEYS AND
ANTHROPOID APES[1]

[Footnote 1: Much of the material of this section was published
originally in _Science_ (Yerkes, 1916).]


I should neglect an important duty as well as waste an opportunity if in
this report I did not call attention to the status of our knowledge
concerning the monkeys and apes and present the urgent need of adequate
provision for the comparative study of all of the primates.

Although for centuries students of nature have been keenly interested in
the various primates, the information which has been accumulated is
fragmentary and wholly inadequate for generally recognized scientific
and practical needs. There is a voluminous literature on many aspects of
the organization and lives of the monkeys and apes, but when one
searches in it for reasonably connected and complete descriptions of the
organisms from any biological angle, one, is certain to meet
disappointment.

Concerning their external characteristics we know much; and our
classifications, if not satisfactory to all, are at least eminently
useful. But when one turns to the morphological sciences of anatomy,
histology, embryology, and pathology, one discovers great gaps, where
knowledge might reasonably be expected. Even gross anatomy has much to
gain from the careful, systematic examination of these organisms. With
still greater force this statement applies to the studies of finer
structural relations. Little is known concerning the embryological
development and life history of certain of the primates, and almost
nothing concerning their pathological anatomy.

Clearly less satisfactory than our knowledge of structure is the status
of information concerning those functional processes which are the
special concern of physiology and pathology. Certain important
experimental studies have been made on the nervous system, but rarely
indeed have physiologists dealt systematically with the functions of
other systems of organs. There are almost no satisfactory physiological
descriptions of the monkeys, anthropoid apes, or lower primates.



SUB-DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER PRIMATES

_Order_ _Sub-orders_      _Families_

          ,- a. PROSIMII (Lemurs and Aye-Ayes)
          |
          |                       ,-  i. Hapalidae (Marmosets)
          |                       |  ii. Cebidae (Howling Monkeys,
PRIMATES -+                       |       Tee Tees, Squirrel Monkeys,
          |                       |       Spider Monkeys, and Capuchin
          |                       |       Monkeys)
          `- b. ANTHROPOIDEA ... -+ iii. Cercopithecidae (Baboons
                                  |       and Macaques)
                                  |  iv. Simiidae (Gibbons, Orangs,
                                  |       Chimpanzees, and Gorillas)
                                  `-  v. Hominidae (Man)




When we turn to the science of genetics we meet a similar condition, for
the literature reveals only scattered bits of information concerning
heredity in the primates. No important experimental studies along
genetic lines have been made with them, and such general observations
from nature as are on record are of extremely uncertain value. Were one
to insist that we know nothing certainly concerning the relation of
heredity in other primates than man, the statement could not well be
disputed.

Occasionally in recent years students of human diseases have employed
monkeys or apes for experimental tests, but aside from the isolated
results thus obtained, extremely little is known concerning the diseases
peculiar to the various types of infra-human primates or the significant
relations of their diseases to those of man.

Next in order of extent to our morphological knowledge of these
organisms is that of their behavior, mental life, and social relations.
But certainly no one who is conversant with the behavioristic,
psychological and sociological literature could do otherwise than
emphasize its incompleteness and inadequacy. For our knowledge of
behavior has come mostly from naturalistic observation, scarcely at all
from experimentation; our knowledge of social relations is obviously
meager and of uncertain value; and finally, our knowledge of mind is
barely more than a collection of carelessly drawn inferences.

This picture of the status of scientific work on the primates, although
not overdrawn, will doubtless surprise many readers, and even the
biologist may find himself wondering why we are so ignorant concerning
the lives of the organisms most nearly akin to us, and naturally of
deepest interest to us. The reasons are not far to seek. Most scientific
investigators are forced by circumstances to work with organisms which
are readily obtained and easily kept. The primates have neither of these
advantages, for many, if not most of them, are expensive to get and
either difficult or expensive to keep in good condition. Clearly, then,
our ignorance is due not to lack of appreciation of the scientific value
of primate research but instead to its difficultness and costliness.

Strangely enough, the practical importance of knowledge of the primates
has seldom been dwelt upon even by those biologists who are especially
interested in it. It is, therefore, appropriate to emphasize the
strictly human value of the work for which I am seeking provision.

During the past few years it has been abundantly and convincingly
demonstrated that knowledge of other organisms may aid directly in the
solution of many of the problems of experimental medicine, of
physiology, genetics, psychology, sociology, and economics. In the light
of these results, it is obviously desirable that all studies of
infrahuman organisms, but especially those of the various primates,
should be made to contribute to the solution of our human problems.

To me it seems that thoroughgoing knowledge of the lives of the
infrahuman primates would inevitably make for human betterment. Through
the science of genetics, as advanced by experimental studies of the
monkeys and anthropoid apes, practical eugenic procedures should be more
safely based and our ability to predict organic phenomena greatly
increased. Similarly, intensive knowledge of the diseases of the other
primates in their relations to human diseases should contribute
importantly to human welfare. And finally, our careful studies of the
fundamental instincts, forms of habit formation, and social relations in
the monkeys and apes should lead to radical improvements in our
educational methods as well as in other forms of social service.

Along theoretical lines, no less than practical, systematic research
with the primates should rapidly justify itself, for upon its results
must rest the most significant historical or genetic biological
descriptions. It is beyond doubt that genetic psychology can best be
advanced to-day by such work, and what is obviously true of this science
is not less true of all the biological sciences which take account of
the developmental or genetic relations of their events.

In view of the probable values of increasingly complete accounts of
primate life, it seems far from extravagant to insist that the securing
of adequate provision for systematic and long continued research is the
most important task for our generation of biologists and the one which
we shall be least excusable for neglecting. Indeed, when one stops to
reflect concerning the situation, it seems almost incredible that the
task has not been accomplished.

Some ten years ago Professor John B. Watson (1906) entered a plea for
the founding of a station for the experimental study of behavior. He
made no special mention of work with the monkeys and apes, but it is
clear from the problems which he enumerates that he would consider them
most important subjects for observation. Professor Watson's plea has
apparently been forgotten by American biologists, and it seems not
inappropriate to revive it at this time. For surely we have advanced
sufficiently along material and scientific lines during the last ten
years to render possible the realization of his hope.

To my knowledge, only one definite attempt has thus far been made to
gain special provision for the study of the primates. Somewhere about
the year 1912 there was established on Tenerife, one of the Canary
Islands, a modest station for the study of the anthropoid apes. I have
already referred to it briefly on page 1. The plan and purpose of this
station, which is of German origin, have been presented briefly by
Rothmann (1912). From personal communications I know that a single
investigator has been in residence at the station since its founding and
that psychological and physiological results of value have been
obtained, but no published reports have come to my attention.

When I first heard of the existence of the German anthropoid station I
naturally thought of the possibility of co√∂perative work, but the events
of the past two years have rendered the chances of cooperation so remote
that it now seems wholly desirable and indeed imperative to seek the
establishment of an American station, which, unlike the German station,
shall provide adequately not only for the study of the anthropoid apes
but for that of all of the lower primates. It should be the function of
such a station or research institute (1) to bring together and correlate
all the information at present available; (2) to fill in existing gaps
observationally and thus complete and perfect our knowledge of these
organisms; (3) to seek to bring all available information to bear upon
the problems of human life.

Hitherto the unsatisfactoriness of progress has been due to the lack of
a definite plan and program. Every investigator has gone his own way,
doing what little his personal means and opportunity rendered possible.
The time has at last come when concerted action seems feasible as well
as eminently desirable. I am therefore offering a plan and program
which, if wisely developed, should lead ultimately to fairly complete
and practically invaluable knowledge of the lives of all of the
primates. There should be provided in a suitable locality a station or
research institute which should offer adequate facilities (1) for the
maintenance of various types of primate in normal, healthy condition;
(2) for the successful breeding and rearing of the animals, generation
after generation; (3) for systematic and continuous observation under
reasonably natural conditions; (4) for experimental investigations from
every significant biological point of view; (5) for profitable
cooperation with existing biological institutes or departments of
research throughout the world.

The station should be located in a region whose climate is highly
favorable to the life of many of the lower primates as well as to that
of man. Such a location is by no means easy to find. Because of my
intense interest in the subject, I have, during the past five years,
prospected in various parts of the world for a satisfactory site. I
shall now attempt to indicate the chief requirements and also the
foremost advantages and disadvantages of several regions which have been
considered. It is first of all requisite that the climate be such as to
agree with the organisms to be studied and such, also, as to render
their breeding normal and dependable. Second in importance is its
satisfactoriness for the life and scientific productiveness of the
observer. While certain tropical localities would meet the first
requirement perfectly, they would prove extremely unsatisfactory for
research activity. It therefore seems essential to find a region whose
climate shall reasonably meet the needs of the experimenter while
adequately meeting those of the animals to be studied.

A further factor which has important bearing upon the productiveness of
the observer is the degree of isolation from civilization and from other
scientific work. No scientist can long work effectively, even in a
reasonably healthy and stimulating climate, if entirely cut off from
similar interests and activities. It is therefore desirable, if at all
possible, to discover a location in the midst of civilization and with
reasonably good opportunities for scientific associations.

With these several desiderata before us, I shall call attention to a
number of possible sites for a station, several of which I have visited.
Southern California, and especially the portion of the State between
Santa Barbara and San Diego, promises fairly well. It is definitely
known that certain, if not all, species of monkey will breed there
fairly satisfactorily, and although it has not yet been demonstrated,
there is no reason to suppose that in certain regions the anthropoid
apes might not also be kept in perfect health and successfully bred. The
main advantages of this general region are (a) a climate which promises
to be reasonably satisfactory for many if not all of the primates; (b)
admirable climatic conditions for investigators; (c) wholly satisfactory
scientific and cultural environment for the staff of a station. The most
significant disadvantages are (a) a temperature, which is at times a
trifle too low for the comfort of certain of the monkeys and apes. It is
by no means certain, however, that they would not usually adapt
themselves to it. (b) The necessity of importing all of the animals and
of having to rely upon successful acclimatization. Of course it is to be
assumed that importation would be necessary only at the outset of such
work, since the animals later should replenish themselves within the
confines of the station.

Florida offers possibilities somewhat similar to those of southern
California, but as I have not had opportunity to examine the conditions
myself, I can say only that in view of such information as is available
the advantage seems to be greatly in favor of the latter.

Cuba, Jamaica, Porto Rico, and for that matter, several of the West
Indies, offer possible sites for a successful station. I have reasonably
intimate personal knowledge only of the conditions in Jamaica. The major
advantages in the West Indies are (a) suitable climatic conditions and
food supply for the animals; and (b) reasonably satisfactory climatic
conditions for the staff. These are, however, more than counterbalanced
in my opinion by the following serious disadvantages: (a) the relative
isolation of the investigators from their fellow scientists; (b) the
necessity of importing all of the animals originally used; (c) the risk
of destruction of the station by storms.

It is definitely known that anthropoid apes as well as monkeys can be
successfully kept, bred, and reared in the West Indies. During the past
year, on the estate of Doha Rosalia Abreu, near Havana, Cuba, a
chimpanzee was born in captivity. A valuable account of this important
event and of the young ape has been published by Doctor Louis Montan√©
(1915). It therefore seems practically certain that regions could be
found readily on Jamaica, Porto Rico, or smaller islands, which would be
eminently satisfactory for the breeding of apes.

There are obvious reasons why an American station for the study of the
primates should be located on territory controlled by the United States
Government, and if a tropical location proves necessary, it would
probably be difficult to find more satisfactory regions, aside from the
inconveniences and risk of importation and the relative isolation of the
investigators, than are available on Porto Rico.

I have not seriously considered the possibility of locating an American
station on the continent of Africa, for although two of the most
interesting and important of the anthropoid apes, the gorilla and the
chimpanzee, are African forms, while many species of monkey are either
found there or could readily be imported, it has seemed to me that the
islands of the West and East Indies and the portions of the United
States referred to above are much to be preferred over anything
available in Africa.

In the East, Borneo, the Philippine Islands, and Hawaii are well worth
considering. Borneo is the home of the gibbon and of at least one
species of orang utan, and in addition to these important assets, it
presents the advantages of (a) a wholly suitable climate and food supply
for monkeys and apes; and (b) climatic conditions for investigators
which, I am informed by scientific friends, are nearly ideal. For
investigators the most serious disadvantage here, as in all other parts
of the East, would be the isolation from other scientific work and
workers.

The possibilities of Central America I considered several years ago when
it seemed to me possible that work might profitably be done with monkeys
and apes on the Canal Zone. The advantages are (a) a climate which
promises fairly well for the animals; and (b) reasonable accessibility
from the United States. The disadvantages are (a) a far from ideal
climate for long continued scientific work; and (b) an environment which
from the cultural and scientific point of view leaves much to be
desired.

Were a permanent psycho-biological station for the study of the primates
to be established in southern California, it would, even though wholly
satisfactory conditions for the breeding, rearing, and studying of the
animals were maintained, furnish more or less inadequate opportunity for
the observation of the animals under free, natural conditions. It would
therefore be necessary, to supplement the work of such a station by
field work in Borneo, Sumatra, Africa, India, South America, and such
other regions as the species of organism under consideration happen to
inhabit.

Considering equally the needs of the experimenter and the demands of the
animals, it seems to me reasonable to conclude that southern California
should be definitely proved unsuitable before a more distant site were
selected. For the information which I have been able to accumulate
convinces me that it would in all probability be possible successfully
to breed and keep the primates there, and it is perfectly clear that in
such event the output of a station would be enormously greater because
of the more favorable conditions for research than in any tropical
region or in a more isolated location.

Assuming that satisfactory provision in the shape of a scientific
establishment for the study of the primates in their relations to man
were available, the following program might be followed: (1) Systematic
and continuous studies of important forms of individual behavior, of
social relations, and of mind; (2) experimental studies of physiological
processes, normal and pathological, and especially of the diseases of
the lower primates, in their relations to those of man; (3) studies of
heredity, embryology, and life history; (4) research in comparative
anatomy, including gross anatomy, histology, neurology, and pathological
anatomy.

Each of these several kinds of research should be in progress almost
continuously in order that no materials or opportunities for observation
be needlessly wasted. Because of the nature of the work, it would be
necessary to provide, first of all, for those functional studies which
demand healthy and normally active organisms, whose life history is
intimately and completely known. This is true of all studies in
behavior, whether physiological, psychological, or sociological.
Simultaneously with behavioristic observations and often upon the same
individuals, genetic experiments might be conducted. This would be
extremely desirable because of the relatively long periods between
generations. After the usefulness of an animal in behavioristic or
genetic inquiries had been exhausted, it might be made to render still
further service to science in various experimental physiological, or
medical inquiries. And finally, the same individual might ultimately be
used for various forms of anatomical research. Thus, it is clear that
the scientific usefulness of a lemur, a monkey, or an ape might be
maintained at a high level throughout and even beyond the period of its
life history.

The program thus briefly sketched would provide either directly or
indirectly for work on every aspect of primate life. Especially
important would be the intimacy of interest and cooperation among
investigators, for the comparative method should be applied consistently
and to the limit of its value. The results of various kinds of
observation should be correlated so that there should ultimately emerge
a unitary and practically valuable account of primate life, to replace
the patchwork of information which we now possess.

Because of the costliness of maintaining and breeding the monkeys and
apes, it is especially desirable that the several kinds of research
mentioned above should be conducted. Indeed, it would seem inexcusably
wasteful to attempt to maintain a primate or anthropoid station for
psychological observations alone, or for any other narrowly limited
biological inquiry.

Furthermore, the station should be permanent, since for many kinds of
work it would be essential to have intimate knowledge of the life
history and descent of an individual. With the lower primates, a
generation might be obtained in from two to five years; with the higher,
not more frequently, probably, than from ten to fifteen years. It
therefore seems not improbable that the value of the work done in such a
station would continue to increase for many years and would not reach
its maximum short of fifty or even one hundred years.

A staff of several highly trained and experienced biologists would be
needed. The following organization is suggested as desirable, although,
as indicated below, not necessarily essential in the beginning: (1) An
expert especially interested in the problems of behavior, psychology,
and sociology, with keen appreciation of practical as well as of
theoretical problems; (2) an assistant trained especially in comparative
physiology; (3) an expert in genetics and experimental zoology; (4) an
assistant with training and interests in comparative anatomy, histology,
and embryology; (5) an expert in experimental medicine, who could
conduct and direct studies of the diseases of man as well as of the
lower primates and of measures for their control; (6) an assistant
trained especially in pathology and neurology.

To this scientific staff of six highly trained individuals there should
be added a business manager, a clerical force of three individuals, a
skilled mechanician, a carpenter, and at least four laborers.

The annual expenditures of an institute with such a working staff, would
in southern California, approximate fifty thousand dollars. It would
therefore be necessary that it have an endowment of approximately one
million dollars.

In the absence of this foundation it would, of course, be possible to
make a reasonably satisfactory beginning on the work which has been
outlined in the following less expensive manner. A working plant might
be established, on ground rented or purchased at a low figure, for about
ten thousand dollars; the salary of a director, assistants, a clerical
helper, and combined mechanic and laborer might be estimated at the same
figure; the cost of animals and of maintenance of the plant would
approximate five thousand dollars. Thus, we should obtain as an estimate
of the expenditures for the first year twenty-five thousand dollars.
Without expansion, the work might be conducted during the second year
for fifteen thousand dollars, and subsequently it might be curtailed or
expanded, resources permitting, according as results achieved and in
prospect justified.

An institute established on such a modest basis as this still might
render largely important scientific service through its own research and
through organized cooperation with other existing research
establishments. Thus, for example, supposing that behavioristic,
psychological, sociological, and genetic inquiries were conducted in the
institute itself, animals might be supplied on a mutually satisfactory
basis to institutes for experimental medicine, for physiological
research, and for anatomical studies. Under such conditions, it is
conceivable that extremely economical and good use might be made of all
the available primate materials. But it is not improbable that even
co√∂perative research would prove on the whole more profitable, except
possibly in the case of morphological work, if investigators could
conduct their studies in the institute itself rather than in distant
laboratories. In any event, the idea of co√∂peration should be prominent
in connection with the organization of a research station for the study
of the primates. For thus, evidently, scientific achievement in
connection with these important types of animal might be vastly
increased over what would be possible in a single relatively small
institution with a limited and necessarily specialized staff of workers.

Despite the fact that biologists generally recognize the importance of
the work under consideration and are eager to have it done, it is
perfectly certain that we shall accomplish nothing unless we devote
ourselves confidently, determinedly and unitedly, with faith, vision,
and enthusiasm, to the realization of a definite plan. Our vision is
clear,--if we are to gather and place at the service of mankind adequate
comparative knowledge of the life of the primates and if we are to make
this possible harvest of scientific results count for human betterment,
we must bend all our efforts to the establishment of a station or
institute for research.



VIII

BIBLIOGRAPHY



BREHM, A. Tierleben.
  1888.

COBURN, C.A. and YERKES, R.M. A study of the behavior of the crow,
  1915.   _Corvus Americanus_ Aud. by the multiple-choice method.
          _Journal of Animal Behavior_, vol. 5, 75-114.

CUVIER, FREDERIC. Description d'un orang-outang, et observations sur
  1810.   ses facult√©es intellectuelles. _Annales du Museum d'Histoire
          naturelle_, vol. 16, 46-65.

DARWIN, C. Origin of species.
  1859.

  1871. The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex.

ELLIOT, D.G. A review of the primates. New York.
  1913.

FRANZ, S.I. On the functions of the cerebrum: the frontal lobes.
  1907.   _Archives of Psychology_, no. 2, 1-64.

  1911. On the functions of the cerebrum: the occipital lobes.
          _Psychological Monographs_, vol. 13, 1-118.

  1913. Observations on the preferential use of the right and left
          hands by monkeys. Journal of Animal Behavior, 3, 140-144.

GARNER, R.L. The speech of monkeys. London.
  1892.

  1896. Gorillas and chimpanzees. London.

  1900. Apes and monkeys; their life and language. Boston and London.

HAGGERTY, M.E. Imitation in monkeys. _Journal of Comparative Neurology_
  1909.   _and Psychology_, vol. 19, 337-455.

HAMILTON, G.V. A study of trial and error reactions in mammals.
  1911.   _Journal of Animal Behavior_, vol. 1, 33-66.

  1914. A study of sexual tendencies in monkeys and baboons. _Journal_
          _of Animal Behavior_, vol. 4, 295-318.

HIRSCHLAFF, L. Der Schimpanzee Konsul. _Zeit. f. p√§d. Psy_., vol. 7, 1.
  1905.

HOBHOUSE, L.T. Mind in evolution. London.
  1915.

HOLMES, S.J. Evolution of intelligence. New York.
  1911.

HRDLICKA, A. Anatomical observations on a collection of orang skulls
  1907.   from western Borneo; with a bibliography. _Proceedings of
          the United States National Museum_, vol. 31, 539-568.

KINNAMAN, A.J. Mental life of two _Macacus rhesus_ monkeys in captivity.
  1902.   _American Journal of Psychology_, vol. 13, 98-148, 173-218.

LASHLEY, K.S. and WATSON, J.B. Notes on the development of a young
  1913.   monkey. _Journal of Animal Behavior_, vol. 3, 114-139.

M√ñBIUS, K. Zur psychologie des Schimpanse. _Zool. Garten_., vol. 8,
  1867.   279-280.

MONTAN√â, L. Un chimpanc√© Cubano. Havana, _El Siglo XX_.
  1915.

MORGAN, C.L. Introduction to comparative psychology. London.
  1906.

PFUNGST, O. Zur Psychologie der Affen. _Ber. √ºber d. V. Kongress f._
  1912.   _exp. Psychol_., 200-205.

ROMANES, G.J. Mental evolution in animals. New York.
  1900.

ROTHMANN, M. Ueber die errichtung einer Station zur psychologischen
  1912.   und hirn[?] physiologischen Erforschung der Menschenaffen.
          _Berliner klinische Wochenschr_., Nr. 42.

SHEPHERD, W.T. Some mental processes of the rhesus monkey.
  1910.   _Psychologic Monographs_, vol. 12, 1-61.

  1915.   Some observations on the intelligence of the chimpanzee.
          _Journal of Animal Behavior_, vol. 5, 391-396.

SOKOLOWSKY, A. Beobachtungen √ºber die Psyche der Menschenaffen.
  1908.   Frankfurt a. M.

THORNDIKE, E.L. The mental life of the monkeys. _Psychological_
  1901.   _Monograph_, vol. 3, 1-57.

  1911.   Animal intelligence. New York. 1911.

WALLACE, A.R. The Malay Archipelago. London.
  1869.

WASHBURN, M.F. The animal mind. New York.
  1908.

WATSON, J.B. The need of an experimental station for the study of
  1906.   certain problems in animal behavior. _Psychological_
          _Bulletin_, vol. 3, 149-156.

  1908.  Imitation in monkeys. _Psychological Bulletin_, vol. 5,
         169-178.

  1909.  Some experiments bearing upon color vision in monkeys.
         _Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology_, vol. 19,
         1-28.

WITMER, L. A monkey with a mind. _Psychological Clinic_, vol. 3, 179-205.
  1909.

  1910.  Intelligent imitation and curiosity in a monkey. _Psychological_
         _Clinic_, vol. 3, 225-227.

YERKES, R.M. The study of human behavior. _Science_, vol. 39, 625-633.
  1914.

  1910.  Maternal instinct in a monkey. _Journal of Animal Behavior_,
         vol. 5, 403-405.

  1916.  Provision for the study of the monkeys and apes. _Science_,
         vol. 43, 231-234.

YERKES, R.M. and COBURN, C.A. A study of the behavior of the pig
  1915.  _Sus scrofa_ by the multiple-choice method. _Journal of_
         _Animal Behavior_, vol. 5, 185-225.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mental Life of Monkeys and Apes
by Robert M. Yerkes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MENTAL LIFE OF MONKEYS ***

***** This file should be named 10843-8.txt or 10843-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/8/4/10843/

Produced by Michael Oltz and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL
